IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021 2225
Learning V ariable Impedance Control via Inverse
Reinforcement Learning for Force-Related Tasks
Xiang Zhang , Liting Sun , Zhian Kuang , and Masayoshi Tomizuka
Abstract—Many manipulation tasks require robots to interact
with unknown environments. In such applications, the ability to
adapt the impedance according to different task phases and en-
vironment constraints is crucial for safety and performance. Al-
though many approaches based on deep reinforcement learning
(RL) and learning from demonstration (LfD) have been proposed
to obtain variable impedance skills on contact-rich manipulation
tasks, these skills are typically task-speciﬁc and could be sensitive to
changes in task settings. This letter proposes an inverse reinforce-
ment learning (IRL) based approach to recover both the variable
impedance policy and reward function from expert demonstra-
tions. We explore different action space of the reward functions to
achieve a more general representation of expert variable impedance
skills. Experiments on two variable impedance tasks (Peg-in-Hole
and Cup-on-Plate) were conducted in both simulations and on a
real FANUC LR Mate 200iD/7 L industrial robot. The comparison
results with behavior cloning and force-based IRL proved that the
learned reward function in the gain action space has better trans-
ferability than in the force space. Experiment videos are available
at https://msc.berkeley.edu/research/impedance-irl.html.
Index Terms —Compliance and impedance control, learning
from demonstration, machine learning for robot control.
I. I NTRODUCTION
R
OBOT systems are increasingly deployed into various
unstructured environments such as factories, warehouses
and hospitals. In these environments, robots need to perform
complex tasks while interacting with unknown environments
in a safe and stable manner. Impedance control, which es-
tablishes a virtual mass-spring-damping contact dynamic, has
been widely applied to these robot systems to guarantee safe
physical interactions. Moreover, many complex manipulation
tasks require the robot to change impedance according to the
task phases. In practice, a variable impedance skill is needed in
such tasks.
In recent years, several learning-based methods have been
introduced to obtain variable impedance skills. Examples in-
Manuscript received October 15, 2020; accepted February 4, 2021. Date of
publication February 23, 2021; date of current version March 11, 2021. This
letter was recommended for publication by Associate Editor T. Kulvicius and
Editor T. Asfour and upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments.(Correspond-
ing author: Xiang Zhang.)
Xiang Zhang, Liting Sun, and Masayoshi Tomizuka are with the Depart-
ment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720 USA (e-mail: xiang_zhang_98@berkeley.edu; litingsun@berkeley.edu;
tomizuka@me.berkeley.edu).
Zhian Kuang is with the Research Institute of Intelligent Control and Sys-
tems, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China, and also with the
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720 USA (e-mail: zhiankuang@foxmail.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LRA.2021.3061374
clude learning from demonstrations (LfD) [1]–[3] and deep
reinforcement learning (RL) with variable impedance action
spaces [4]–[6]. However, the task-speciﬁc impedance skills
obtained by LfD approaches may fail when the task changes.
Besides, designing a suitable reward function is challenging
for RL. Therefore, their skill transferability is limited. A more
general way of learning variable impedance skills needs to be
found to tackle these problems.
The development of the inverse reinforcement learning (IRL)
method provides a new insight on learning from demonstration.
The goal of IRL is to recover the expert reward or cost function
from demonstrations. New policies can then be obtained by
reoptimizing this learned reward in new scenarios. Previously,
IRL has been applied to several tasks such as plate placing [7]
and route planning [8]. However, there is no previous work
applying the IRL method to the variable impedance control to
our knowledge. Furthermore, the action space for the reward
function for this task is still unclear. Should we deﬁne rewards
directly on the force, or should we look for a reward function in
terms of the impedance gain?
This letter proposes an inverse reinforcement learning based
approach to recover both the variable impedance policy and the
reward function from expert demonstrations. While this learned
policy can be utilized to solve the original task, new variable
impedance policies can be generated for different task settings
by using RL to maximize the learned reward function. Since the
learned reward function only depends on the current observation
and action, it is agnostic to task settings. Thus, our approach is
more general and has better transferability in comparison with
previous LfD approaches.
Furthermore, similar to [6], we argue that, for force-related
tasks, learning in the impedance gain action space is better than
learning in the force action space. The basic idea is that the
performance of gain policy is guaranteed by the impedance
control law and therefore improves the reward transferability.
For validation, we compare our approach with behavior cloning
(BC) [9] baseline in two tasks: Peg-in-Hole and Cup-on-Plate
(as shown in Fig. 1), and the inﬂuence of two action spaces
(impedance gain and Cartesian space force) have also been
studied. As a result, our approach successfully recovers the
expert variable impedance policy and achieves better transfer
performance than BC and the force-based IRL in the testing
scenarios.
This letter’s remainder is organized as follows: Related works
are introduced in Section II. Our controller design and learning
framework are outlined in Section III. Section IV presents the
2377-3766 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 12,2026 at 15:32:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2226 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021
Fig. 1. Left: a human expert demonstrates on the robot, Right: the robot
accomplishes the task with the learned variable impedance skill.
experiments in simulation and on the real robot. Finally, the
conclusion is given in Section V.
II. R ELA TEDWORK
A. F orce-Control Related Tasks in Robotics
Force control is essential for many robotics applications, such
as the assembly, the surface polishing, and the machining. Previ-
ous works in this ﬁeld can be categorized into two methods: pure
force control and position-force control. The pure force control
accomplishes tasks by directly controlling the robot’s force in
the Cartesian space or in the joint space. Examples can be found
in the peg-hole assembly task [10] and visual manipulations
tasks from [11]. For the position-force control, it can be further
separated into the hybrid position/force control [12] and the
impedance control [13]. In the ﬁrst method, the position and
force are controlled in two separate channels. Researchers have
deployed this method on surface polishing tasks and peg-in-
hole [3]. However, the position-force decoupling can only be
achieved when the task is well-deﬁned and may not be available
for complex tasks [2]. Impedance control mitigates this limit
by controlling the force applied by the robot when it deviates
from the desired trajectory and has been introduced to the valve
turning task [2] and several tools using tasks [14].
B. V ariable Impedance Control
In many complex tasks, variable impedance skills are needed
for robots to interact with the environment. Learning from
demonstration approaches are utilized to learn the expert vari-
able impedance skills. In [1], human experts control a robot’s
impedance by a hand-held impedance control interface. The
expert data is then recorded by dynamical movement primi-
tives (DMP) and learned by the regression method. Researches
in [2] directly estimated the robot impedance from the human
demonstrations and then encoded the robot skill by Gaussian
Mixture Regression (GMR) with sensed forces. However, these
previous works learned expert variable impedance skills on
speciﬁc tasks which are difﬁcult to transfer to a different task
setting. In our approach, both the expert variable impedance skill
and the reward function would be recovered, and new skills can
be generated by reoptimizing the learned reward function with
RL.
In the ﬁeld of reinforcement learning, Buchli et al. [4] uti-
lized policy improvement with path integrals ( PI 2), which is a
model-free method to learn the joint space variable impedance
skills. However, the joint space impedance they are using limited
policy transferability. Reyet al. [5] further improved this method
by simultaneously learning trajectories and a state-dependent
varying stiffness model, which is now represented in the robot
end-effector frame. Martin et al. [6] compared the RL perfor-
mance of different action spaces in robot manipulation tasks.
They showed the variable impedance control in end-effector
space (VICES) has an advantage in constrained and contact-rich
tasks. However, the results from RL highly depend on the design
of the reward function. With our method, the reward function
can be recovered from expert demonstrations and generates new
policy for different tasks with RL methods.
C. Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Inverse reinforcement learning is one of the learning from
demonstrations methods. Unlike the traditional LfD approaches
such as BC, where the main idea is to mimic expert actions, the
goal of IRL is to infer the expert’s reward function from expert
demonstrations. Then the optimal policy is obtained by maxi-
mizing this reward function using forward RL. One commonly
used framework for IRL is the maximum entropy IRL [8]. This
framework assumes the expert trajectories follow a Boltzmann
distribution with the cost and updates cost function by maximum
likelihood learning. Levine et al. [15] further improved this
framework to high dimensional and continuous tasks by using
the local Laplace approximation of the cost function. However,
these methods require the dynamics model for the cost function
update, which is challenging to obtain in robot manipulation
tasks.
Recently, Finn et al. [7] proposed a sample-based IRL ap-
proach to recover cost function in high dimensional state-action
spaces. In this method, the agent alternates between optimiz-
ing the cost function and optimizing policy, which generates
trajectories to minimize the cost. Since the optimizer requires
no dynamics model, both the cost function and the policy are
updated in a model-free way. Later the authors found that their
method agrees with the generative adversarial network (GAN)
formulation and introduced the GAN-GCL algorithm in [16].
One practical problem for GAN-GCL is that it evaluates the
full trajectory and results in high variance estimates. Adversar-
ial inverse reinforcement learning (AIRL) [17] improved the
performance by extending the GAN-GCL algorithm to single
state-action pairs and achieved superior results in simulation.
Although many IRL algorithms employ entropy regularisa-
tion to prevent the simply mimicking the expert policy, there
is no previous work focus on the effect of action space selec-
tion to the authors’ knowledge. In our method, by introducing
variable impedance gain action space, we can ﬁnd more general
representation of the expert policy than using force as action and
improve the reward function transfer performance in a new task
setting.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 12,2026 at 15:32:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING V ARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL VIA INVERSE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR FORCE-RELA TED TASKS 2227
Fig. 2. Controller design.
III. P ROPOSED APPROACH
A. Cartesian Space Impedance Control
Consider the dynamics model of the robot in the Cartesian
space:
M (x)¨x +C(x, ˙x) ˙x +G( ˙x)= J −Tτ−Fext (1)
where M (x) is the mass-inertia matrix, C(x, ˙x) denotes the
Coriolis matrix, G( ˙x) is the gravity vector, ¨x, ˙x and x are
respectively the Cartesian acceleration, velocity and position of
the end-effector,J is the Jacobian matrix andτ,Fext represents
the joint space motor torque input and the external force, respec-
tively. Under the impedance control law, the robot will behave
as a mass-spring-damping system, which follows the dynamics
equation:
Md(¨x − ¨xd)+ Bd( ˙x− ˙xd)+ Kd(x−xd)= −Fext (2)
whereMd,Bd,Kd are the desired mass, damping and stiffness
matrices. By solving (1), (2) and setting Md = M (x),t h e
impedance control law can be written as:
τ= J TF
F = M (x)¨xd +C(x, ˙x)˙x +G(x)
−Bd( ˙x− ˙xd)−Kd(x−xd)
(3)
This impedance control law can be further separated into two
parts: the feed-forward term Fff to cancel the nonlinear robot
dynamics and the feedback term Ffb which tracks the desired
trajectory:
Fff = M (x)¨xd +C(x, ˙x)˙x +G(x) (4)
Ffb = −Bd( ˙x− ˙xd)−Kd(x−xd)
= −Bd ˙e−Kde
(5)
where e and ˙e are the tracking error and the tracking velocity.
The stiffness matrix Kd and the damping matrix Bd are also
known as the impedance gain matrices, since they map the track-
ing error and velocity to the feedback forceFfb . To simplify the
notations, we use K (stiffness) and B (damping) to represent
Kd andBd in the rest of letter.
B. Learning V ariable Impedance Skills With AIRL
Fig. 2 depicts our controller design. In our approach, the
observations from the robot and the environment are the tracking
error e and the tracking velocity ˙e. Our policy takes in the
observations and outputs either the impedance gain K,B or
the feedback force Ffb , depending on the action space design.
The impedance gain controller then calculates the control inputs
by (3) and controls the robot.
We employ AIRL [17] to learn both the expert policy and
the reward function and the training procedure is detailed in
Algorithm 1. In this adversarial training setting, the discrimi-
nator which separates the generator trajectories and the expert
trajectories is deﬁned as:
Dθ(o,a )= exp(rθ(o,a ))
exp(rθ(o,a )) +π(a|o) (6)
whererθ(o,a ) is the reward function we want to learn andπ(a|o)
is the probability of taking actiona at observationo under current
policy. The discriminator is updated to minimize this loss [17]:
L(θ)=
T∑
t=0
−ED [logDθ(ot,at)]−Eπt [1−logDθ(ot,at)]
(7)
The generator is the variable impedance policy. During the
training, the policy is updated to maximize the trajectory reward,
which is evaluated by the reward function. In our approach, we
use TRPO [18], which is a policy gradient based RL method to
update the policy.
Since the environment dynamics are unknown, we applied RL
to reoptimize a new policy in a different task setting to test the
performance of the learned reward function. In the RL process,
the policy update is the same as the IRL but with the ﬁxed learned
reward function.
IV . EXPERIMENTS
To evaluate our proposed approach, we conduct experiments
in several robotic tasks, both in simulation and on a real robot. In
the simulation, we design two variable impedance control tasks:
Peg-in-Hole task and Cup-on-Plate task. For the experiment
validation, we collect human expert data for the Cup-on-Plate
task by kinesthetic teaching and test learned policies on the real
robot.
To validate our approach’s generalizability, we compare the
performance of our approach with four baseline methods: 1)
force-based AIRL, 2) gain-based BC, 3) force-based BC and
4) constant gain. We hypothesize that using the impedance
gain as action space improves the transferability to the testing
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 12,2026 at 15:32:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2228 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021
Fig. 3. Training and testing scenarios for (a) the Peg-in-Hole task and (b) the
Cup-on-Plate task, orange stars indicate the goal points.
TABLE I
PEG-IN-HOLE SUCCESS RAT E I NDIFFERENT TILT ANGLES
scenarios, either via AIRL or BC, since the impedance control
law remains effective when task setting changes. Furthermore,
by recovering the expert reward function, learning gain in the
impedance control via AIRL is a more general approach than
BC.
A. Tasks in Simulator
1) Task Setups: As depicted in Fig. 3, two robotic tasks,
Peg-in-Hole and Cup-on-Plate, are conducted in the Mujoco [19]
simulation to evaluate the proposed approach. In the Peg-in-Hole
task, the diameters of the peg and hole are 25.37 mm and
25.40 mm, respectively. For the Cup-on-Plate task, FANUC LR
Mate 200iD/7 L industrial robot is included into simulation and
the robot’s goal is to place a cup on a plate in a fast and steady
manner. In two simulation environments, model parameters such
as the mass-inertia matrix M (x), the Coriolis matrix C(x, ˙x)
and the gravity vectorG(x) are calculated by Mujoco automat-
ically using the simulation model.
2) Observation Spaces: We use the tracking error e and
tracking velocity ˙e together as observations for two tasks. The
goal points are shown in Fig. 3, and the end-effectors are located
on the center of mass (COM) of the peg for the Peg-in-Hole task
and on the cup for the Cup-on-Plate task.
Moreover, since a single pair of e and ˙e doesn’t provide
acceleration information and may not fully represent the system
dynamics. We also employ an augmented observation space
which contains a history of e and ˙e from the last ﬁve time steps
for evaluation. In Table I,II and III, evaluations on the augmented
observation space are marked with “His” which denotes using a
history of e and ˙e.
3) Action Spaces: There are two options for the action space
selection, the force action, and the impedance gain action. For
TABLE II
PEG-IN-HOLE SUCCESS RAT E I NDIFFERENT MESH SCALES
TABLE III
CUP-ON-PLA TERELA TIVEPERFORMANCE DIFFERENCE
the force action case, our policy outputs the Cartesian space
force exerted by the robot. For the impedance gain action space,
our policy outputs impedance gains and the control input are
obtained by equation (5).
To reduce the dimension of the gain action space, we suppose
that the stiffness matrixK and damping matrixB are diagonal.
Therefore, our policy outputs diagonal elements of two matrices
rather than full matrices. Furthermore, by enforcing diagonal
elements to be positive, we can ensure the stiffness matrix K
and the damping matrix B are positive deﬁnite. To extend our
approach to the full matrix case, Cholesky decomposition can
be utilized to guarantee K,B > 0.
Different impedance gain outputs are utilized for two tasks
according to tasks. In the Peg-in-Hole task, the peg veloc-
ity is small, and the stiffness plays a main role in the in-
sertion. Thus, the policy outputs a 6-dimensional stiffness,
[K1,K 2,K 3,K 4,K 5,K 6] with ﬁxed damping term, where
Ki(i =1 , 2, 3) denote the stiffness for the position error and
Ki(i =4 , 5, 6) denote the stiffness for the orientation error. For
the Cup-on-Plate task, the tracking velocity is large, and the
damping term affects the performance. Therefore, the output
of our policy is now [K1,...,K 6,d ], which contains an extra
damping factor d. The stiffness and damping matrices can then
be obtained by:
K = diag(K1,K 2,K 3,K 4,K 5,K 6) B = d
√
K
We use a 1-dimensional damping factor rather than another 6-
dimensional damping for dimension reduction.
4) Generating Expert Data: Fifty expert trajectories are col-
lected for both tasks by two designed variable impedance con-
trollers. In the Peg-in-Hole task, the expert is a ﬁxed tip stiffness
controller. The stiffness of the peg tip can be transferred to the
COM frame by:
KCOM = JT
tip Ktip Jtip (8)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 12,2026 at 15:32:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING V ARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL VIA INVERSE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR FORCE-RELA TED TASKS 2229
where Ktip denotes the stiffness matrix of the peg tip and
Jtip is the Jacobian matrix between COM and the tip, which
depends on the peg’s conﬁguration. Thus, this ﬁxed tip stiffness
is a variable stiffness on the COM. The uncorrelated stiffness
diag(K1,K 2,K 3,K 4,K 5,K 6) is solved by:
diag(K1,K 2,K 3,K 4,K 5,K 6) e = KCOM e (9)
where e is the tracking error.
In the Cup-on-Plate task, the variable impedance controller
contains three phases:
controller phases =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
accelerating, ifepos >e 1
switching, ife1 >e pos >e 2
reaching, ife2 >e pos
whereepos =
√
e2x +e2y +e2z indicates the Cartesian space po-
sition tracking error and e1,e 2 are two gain changing points
which are 0.4 m and 0.2 m. As shown in Fig. 5(a), our designed
expert control law chooses the largest gain to accelerate in the
accelerating phase and generally switching to the smaller gain in
the switching phase. In the reaching phase, the robot approaches
the plate with minimum speed to guarantee safety.
5) Performance Score: In the experiment, we designed per-
formance functions to evaluate different policies. In the Peg-in-
Hole task, the performance function outputs a constant penalty
if the peg is not aligned with the hole. Otherwise, it penalizes
the z direction error, which is the vertical distance to the target
point.
The designed performance function in the Cup-on-Plate task
only penalizes the tracking error e when in the accelerating
phase and the tracking velocity ˙e in the reaching phase. If in the
switching phase, the the performance function penalizes both e
and ˙e.
6) Training Details: For the network architectures, our re-
ward function is a 2-layer neural network with 32 units. For
the policy, we use a 2-layer gaussian policy with 32 units when
using a single pair of e and ˙e as observation. The units number
increases to 128 for the augmented observation space. The
activation function is Tanh for the policy and Relu for the reward
function.
For the Learning hyper-parameters, the batch size and tra-
jectory length of TRPO are 8000 and 200, respectively in the
Peg-in-Hole task. For the Cup-on-Plate task, we use a batch size
of 10 000 and trajectory length of 500.
7) Evaluations: In evaluation, we set two metrics to com-
pare different approaches, which are the imitation learning
performance in the training scenario and the transfer learning
performance in the testing scenarios.
Peg-in-Hole task: We ﬁrst evaluate the imitation learning
results of four policies in the training scenario. The mean per-
formance score and the mean success rate of three runs are
given in the rightmost column of Fig. 4(b) and marked with
(T) in Table I and Table II. We observe that all policies achieve
high success rates in accomplishing the Peg-in-Hole task and
Fig. 4. Transfer performance on the Peg-in-Hole task.
their performances are similar, which approves these polices
successfully imitate the expert in the training.
We then transfer the learned reward functions obtained by
AIRL to generate new policies in the testing scenario. Since
Peg-in-Hole is a difﬁcult task, the initial policy inﬂuences the
ﬁnal reoptimizing results. In one setting, we select the three
best policies from ﬁve random runs to evaluate the transfer
performance to mitigate this effect. For BC, we directly transfer
the policy obtained in training to the testing scenarios.
In the ﬁrst testing scenario, we change the tilt angles of the peg.
Results are depicted in Fig. 4(a) and Table I. We ﬁnd that gain-
based AIRL achieves the highest success rate and outperforms
all the other policies. Two BC policies achieve a high success
rate when the tilt angle is close to −2◦, but fails to generalize
to tilt angles −6◦and 2◦, where trajectories deviate from expert
demonstrations. The force-based AIRL has zero success rate
when the tilt angles are 2◦. In this case, the force policy imitates
the expert action in the training, pushing the peg in the wrong
direction from the hole and falls. However, since the sign of
the tracking error e changes, the feedback force generated by
the impedance control law also reverses the direction. Thus the
gain policy is still valid when the tilt angle changes and avoids
getting stuck in the middle. For the constant gain baseline, it
achieves 100% success rate when the tilt angle is0◦, which is the
simplest scenario. However, since it doesn’t utilize the variable
impedance control gain, its success rate is much lower than our
proposed approach when increasing the tilt angle.
For the second testing scenario, we use smaller mesh scales
of the peg and hole. Fig. 4(b) depicts the performance scores
results. We notice that using gain as action improves the trans-
ferability, either for AIRL or BC. The reason is that, as shown
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 12,2026 at 15:32:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2230 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021
Fig. 5. Policy comparisons for Cup-on-Plate task: two top ﬁgures of (a) and (b) compare the policy outputs of gain-based AIRL and BC with the expert gain
policy; three bottom ﬁgures of (a) and (b) show the force applied by policies in x, y, z directions.
in Fig. 2, the feedback force of the gain policy is generated by
the impedance control law, which is still effective when task
setting changes. However, the force policy doesn’t have this
advantage and could be infeasible in the new dynamics. The
performance score difference is negligible for gain-based AIRL
and BC. However, as shown in Table II, the gain-based AIRL
achieves higher successful rate when the mesh scale is small.
We also tested our approach with all the baselines on the
augmented observation space. As shown in Table I and Table II,
our approach still achieves the highest success rate and has
similar performance in comparison with the original observation
space. However, since the dimension of the augmented observa-
tion space is much larger, the force-based AIRL policy is more
difﬁcult to train and has even worse generalization results.
Cup-on-Plate task: The ﬁrst column of Table III shows the
relative performance difference with the expert in training. This
difference is a normalized performance score difference with
the expert, and a larger value indicates a larger performance
difference. In the training scenario, all four policies accomplish
the Cup-on-Plate task and achieve a similar performance score
compared to the expert. We also compare the gains and forces
applied by learned policies, and the results are depicted in
Fig. 5(a). We observe that both the gain-based AIRL and the
force-based AIRL recover the most features of the expert. Since
the objective of BC encourages the policy to directly mimic the
expert action, two BC baselines achieve the best performance in
imitating expert gain and force policies.
In the testing, the robot end-effector is initialized in four
different positions. The performance scores in comparison with
the expert are given in Table III, and four initial testing points are
named from T1 to T4. As a result, gain-based AIRL outperforms
other policies in T1, T2, T4 and only falls behind the constant
gain baseline in T3.
We explore the underlying reason for this difference by
comparing the gains and forces. Fig. 5(b) depicts the policy
comparison results for T1. In comparison, the gain-based AIRL
recovers the expert gain changing trend and the expert force in
x,y directions. However, it chooses small stiffness inz direction
in the beginning and applies a much smaller force than the
expert. This result may relate to the changes of robot dynamics
in the new initial point. Since the mass matrix M (x) in (3) is a
function of the current robot conﬁguration, the Cartesian space
dynamics is coupled. We observe that, under the new setting,
the force applied iny direction will also result in an acceleration
in z direction, while this effect is negligible in the training
scenario. This dynamics change could inﬂuence the way to max-
imize the reward function and therefore inﬂuences the learned
policy.
For gain-based BC, it learns to set a small stiffness and large
damping when the error is small. However, the gain switching
happens too late, and the performance score is penalized for the
ﬁnal velocity. As depicted in Fig. 5(b), the force-based AIRL
applies force in the wrong direction in x,y axes, and fails in the
testing scenario. The reason is that the learned reward function
for the force action encourages imitation of the expert force
actions, which cannot drive the cup to the plate with the new
initial point.
The evaluation results using the augmented observation space
are shown in Table III. The augmented observation space doesn’t
improve the performance either for the gain action or for the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 12,2026 at 15:32:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING V ARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL VIA INVERSE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR FORCE-RELA TED TASKS 2231
Fig. 6. Policy comparisons for the real robot: (a) gain-based AIRL and BC policies in the training, (b) gain-based AIRL and BC policies in the testing.
force action in the training and testing and our approaches still
outperforms all the baselines.
B. Experiments on the Real Robot
We also evaluate our method on the real-world Cup-on-Plate
task. In the real-world experiment, expert data is collected by
a human expert on the real robot. Then the learned policies are
transferred to the real robot for the performance evaluation.
1) Task Setup: The real-world experimental setup consists of
the host and target computer, the F/T sensor, and the FANUC LR
Mate 200iD robot [20]. We programmed the Cartesian variable
impedance control algorithm on the host PC and it controls
the real robot system which is connected to the target PC via
Simulink Real-Time. The model parameters of the real robot
such as the mass-inertia matrix M (x), the Coriolis matrix
C(x, ˙x) and the gravity vector G(x) are obtained by the
Euler-Lagrange method [21]
2) Collecting Human Expert Data: In the data collec-
tion process, the human expert applies force and torque
on the end-effector to place cup on the plate. This 6-
dimensional Cartesian space force and torque are measured
by the F/T sensor and the control input is then calculated
with (3). We record both the tracking state [e, ˙e] and the
human expert force together as the human expert data. The
human expert gain is estimated in the data processing. We collect
thirty expert trajectories with the same initial point as the training
scenario in the simulation.
3) Gain Estimation Using Sliding Window Method: To re-
cover the expert gain policy, we apply a similar method as [2],
which uses a short sliding window to estimate stiffness and
damping from the force. Each time window contains ten state-
force pairs, and expert gain is estimated by solving (5) with Least
Square.
4) Evaluation: With real-world human expert data, we
learned both a policy and a reward function in the simulation
environment by using AIRL. Training settings other than expert
data remain the same as the simulation Cup-on-Plate task.
TABLE IV
AVERAGE TRAJECTORY DEVIA TION ON THE REAL ROBOT
TABLE V
FINAL DEVIA TION ON THE REAL ROBOT
We ﬁrst evaluate the performance of two gain action ap-
proaches,which are gain-based AIRL and BC. Fig. 6(a) depicts
the real-world expert gains and the recovered gain policies.
Although the expert policy is noisy and the Sim-to-Real gap
exists, both the gain-based AIRL and BC successfully recover
the expert gains. We then collect three trajectories with the
learned policy on the real robot. As shown in Table IV and
Table V, average deviations with the expert of the gain-based
AIRL and BC are close to 10 mm and the ﬁnal deviations from
the target point are both 12 mm.
We also evaluate two gain action approaches in the testing
scenario with a different initial position. As shown in Fig. 6(b),
the BC policy tends to apply constant damping and x direction
stiffness in the testing scenario and causes lagging in comparison
with the expert trajectory. However, the gain-based AIRL suc-
cessfully recovers the expert variable impedance policy. Thus,
in the testing, the average deviation from the expert and the ﬁnal
deviation are 13.4 mm and 10.8 mm, respectively, which are
much smaller than the gain-based BC and in the same range as
in the training scenario.
For the force-based AIRL, it cannot ﬁnish the Cup-on-Plate
task and ﬁnally drives the robot out of the feasible workspace,
both in the training and testing. Its failure is caused by the large
sim-to-real gap on the force action space. As shown is Fig. 7,
the velocity responses of the same force action in simulation
and real-robot is too different which makes the learned policy in
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 12,2026 at 15:32:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2232 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, APRIL 2021
Fig. 7. V elocity response of the robot in simulation and real-world to same
(a) gain action and (b) force action.
simulation hard to directly transfer to the real-world. However,
for the gain policy, the feedback impedance control gain prevents
the trajectory from deviating too much from the target point and
therefore result in a much smaller sim-to-real gap for policy
transfer. For the force-based BC, it can reach the target point
in the training but with a much larger ﬁnal deviation than
two gain based methods. Moreover, it also fails in the testing
scenario.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this letter, we introduced an IRL based approach to recover
variable impedance policies and reward functions from expert
demonstrations. While the learned policy can be utilized in
the original task, new impedance policies can be generated
by optimizing the learned reward function for different task
settings. We also explored the effect of action spaces selection on
recovering expert rewards. Beneﬁting from the feedback control
law, we argue that using gain as action can improve the reward
transfer performance.
Experiments are conducted to evaluate our approach. In the
simulation, the gain-based AIRL successfully imitates the expert
demonstrations during the training and has better transfer learn-
ing results than all the baselines. For the real robot experiment,
although the sim-to-real gap exists, our approach successfully
recovers the expert trajectory in the training and outperforms
BC in a different initial position.
Although our approach achieves an improved generalization
results than traditional LfD methods, there still are some limi-
tations. First, we employ a simpliﬁed impedance control law as
in the previous references [4], [6], which doesn’t measure the
external force and results in a coupled Cartesian space dynamics.
In the future work, we would like to decouple the dynamics
by adding the external force into the impedance control law.
Moreover, in our approach, we assume the waypoints are ﬁxed
and given in the task. In the future, we plan to include waypoints
of the expert trajectory as one of the policy outputs and image
of the workspace can be utilized as an input. In this way, our
method can be extended to handle tasks with time-varying goal
points.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Peternel, T. Petriˇ c, and J. Babiˇ c, “Human-in-the-loop approach for
teaching robot assembly tasks using impedance control interface,” inProc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat. , 2015, pp. 1497–1502.
[2] F. J. Abu-Dakka, L. Rozo, and D. G. Caldwell, “Force-based learning of
variable impedance skills for robotic manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE-RAS
18th Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) , 2018, pp. 1–9.
[3] T. Tang, H.-C. Lin, Y . Zhao, Y . Fan, W. Chen, and M. Tomizuka, “Teach
industrial robots peg-hole-insertion by human demonstration,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatronics , 2016, pp. 488–494.
[4] J. Buchli, F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, and S. Schaal, “Learning variable
impedance control,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 820–833, 2011.
[5] J. Rey, K. Kronander, F. Farshidian, J. Buchli, and A. Billard, “Learning
motions from demonstrations and rewards with time-invariant dynamical
systems based policies,” Auton. Robots, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 45–64, 2018.
[6] R. Martín-Martín, M. A. Lee, R. Gardner, S. Savarese, J. Bohg, and A.
Garg, “V ariable impedance control in end-effector space: An action space
for reinforcement learning in contact-rich tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) , Macau, China, 2019, pp. 1010–1017,
doi: 10.1109/IROS40897.2019.8968201.
[7] C. Finn, S. Levine, and P . Abbeel, “Guided cost learning: Deep inverse
optimal control via policy optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2016, pp. 49–58.
[8] B. D. Ziebart, A. L. Maas, J. A. Bagnell, and A. K. Dey, “Maximum
entropy inverse reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 23rd AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., Chicago, IL, USA,Jul. 13–17, 2008, pp. 1433–1438.
[9] D. A. Pomerleau, “Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural
network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 1989, pp. 305–313.
[10] T. Inoue, G. De Magistris, A. Munawar, T. Y okoya, and R. Tachibana,
“Deep reinforcement learning for high precision assembly tasks,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2017, pp. 819–825.
[11] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P . Abbeel, “End-to-end training of deep
visuomotor policies,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1334–1373,
2016.
[12] M. H. Raibert and J. J. Craig, “Hybrid position/force control of manipula-
tors,” ASME. J. Dyn. Sys., Meas., Control. , vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 126–133,
Jun. 1981, doi: 10.1115/1.3139652.
[13] N. Hogan, “Impedance Control: An Approach to Manipulation: Part II–
Implementation,” ASME. J. Dyn. Sys., Meas., Control., vol. 107, no. 1, pp.
8–16, Mar. 1985, doi: 10.1115/1.3140713.
[14] Y . Li, G. Ganesh, N. Jarrassé, S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schaeffer, and E.
Burdet, “Force, impedance, and trajectory learning for contact tooling and
haptic identiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1170–1182,
Oct. 2018.
[15] S. Levine and V . Koltun, “Continuous inverse optimal control with locally
optimal examples,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2012.
[16] C. Finn, P . Christiano, P . Abbeel, and S. Levine, “A connection be-
tween generative adversarial networks, inverse reinforcement learning,
and energy-based models,” CoRR, vol. abs/1611.03852, 2016.
[17] J. Fu, K. Luo, and S. Levine, “Learning robust rewards with adversarial
inverse reinforcement learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1710.11248, 2017.
[18] J. Schulman, S. Levine, P . Abbeel, M. Jordan, and P . Moritz, “Trust region
policy optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2015, pp. 1889–
1897.
[19] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y . Tassa, “Mujoco: A physics engine for model-
based control,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2012,
pp. 5026–5033.
[20] Z. Kuang, X. Zhang, L. Sun, H. Gao, and M. Tomizuka, “Feedback-based
digital higher-order terminal sliding mode for 6-dof industrial manipula-
tors,” 2021, arXiv:2102.03531.
[21] Z. Kuang, H. Gao, and M. Tomizuka, “Precise linear-motor synchroniza-
tion control via cross-coupled second-order discrete-time fractional-order
sliding mode,” IEEE Trans. Mechatron. , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 358–368,
Feb. 2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 12,2026 at 15:32:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 