Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Robotics and Autonomous Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/robot
Adaptive variable impedance control for dynamic contact force
tracking in uncertain environment
Duan Jinjun, Gan Yahui *, Chen Ming, Dai Xianzhong
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, PR China
Key Lab of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education, Nanjing, 210096, PR China
h i g h l i g h t s
• Adaptive variable impedance control for dynamic force tracking in uncertain environment is discussed.
• It combines the idea of variable impedance control with the advantage of the adaptive control.
• It is achieved by adjusting tracking error to compensate the unknown environment and dynamic desired forcet.
• Stability and convergence of the method are demonstrated for a stable force tracking execution.
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 25 October 2017
Received in revised form 8 December 2017
Accepted 22 January 2018
Available online 1 February 2018
Keywords:
Adaptive variable impedance control
Contact force tracking
Uncertain environment
Modified impedance control
Uncertainties
a b s t r a c t
The traditional constant impedance control is a simple but effective method widely used in many fields
including contact force tracking. Using this method, the location of the environment relative to the
robot and the stiffness of the environment must be known, and usually the desired force is constant.
However, for applications in dynamic contact force tracking in uncertain environment, it is not an effective
solution. In this paper, a new adaptive variable impedance control is proposed for force tracking which
has the capability to track the dynamic desired force and compensate for uncertainties (in terms of
unknown geometrical and mechanical properties) in environment. In this study, the contact force model
of robot end-effector and the environment is analyzed. Specifically, the contact force is used as the
feedback force of a position-based impedance controller to actively track the dynamic desired force in
uncertain environment. To adapt any environment stiffness uncertainties, a modified impedance control
is proposed. To reduce the force tracking error caused by environment location uncertainty, an adaptive
variable impedance control is implemented for the first time by adjusting the impedance parameters on-
line based on the tracking error to compensate the unknown environment and the dynamic desired force.
Furthermore, stability and convergence of the adaptive variable impedance control are demonstrated
for a stable force tracking execution. Simulations and experiments to compare the performance of force
tracking with the constant impedance control and the adaptive variable impedance control, perspectively,
are conducted. The results strongly prove that the proposed approach can achieve better force tracking
performance than the constant impedance control.
© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
With the development of the robot technology, contact oper-
ation is becoming an important area of robot application. Typical
examples include assembly, polishing, deburring, dual-arm coor-
dination or dexterous hand manipulations. For these applications,
control of interaction between a robot and the environment is
* Corresponding author at: School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing,
210096, PR China.
E-mail addresses: duan_jinjun@yeah.net (J. Duan), ganyahui@yeah.net
(Y. Gan), chenming317@yeah.net (M. Chen), xzdai@seu.edu.cn (X. Dai).
crucial for successfully executing the tasks, since the robot (or cer-
tain parts) has to contact and operate on the surface of objects. In
these cases, purely using a motion control strategy for controlling
contact force is unreasonable, because when the robot interacts
with environment, the desired force should be maintained while
following the desired trajectories.
The interaction task can be executed successfully by using the
motion control only when the entire task can be planned accu-
rately and completely, which requests both of the robot and the
environment are properly modeled and all the parameters are
accurately known. Usually, robot modeling can be known with
enough accuracy [1], but an accurate model of the environment
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2018.01.009
0921-8890/© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65 55
is difficult to obtain. In practice, the modeling error leads to the
existence of planning error, thereby the planning error reflects to
the contact force causing a deviation from the desired trajectory.
Along with the accumulation of contact force errors, the saturation
of the joint actuators is reached or breakage of the parts in contact
occurs. If a compliant behavior is ensured or the environment
information can be estimated accurately during the interaction,
the above drawback can be overcome. The contact force can de-
scribe the properties of the interaction in most cases. Usually, a
force/torque sensor is mounted between the wrist and the end-
effector to achieve the contact force. The robot with the sensor
means that it has the ability to control the force, and the most
essential problem of force control is the force tracking.
Force tracking has attracted a wide number of researchers over
the past decades. For the static environment which the environ-
mental information is certain or the applications are known, the
classical force control strategies can achieve good performance.
The classical force control includes impedance control [2] and
hybrid position and force control [3]. But for the uncertain en-
vironment, the environment stiffness and location are unknown,
it is difficult to obtain a perfect model for the various unknown
features, so it is more difficult for force tracking.
The current research of force tracking control in uncertain
environment can be classified into three categorizes. (1) Indirect
adjustment of reference trajectory. The basic idea is to identify
the environmental information including stiffness and location. A
simple trajectory modification scheme using adaptive techniques
to estimate environment stiffness or adjust controller gains to
compensate for unknown environment stiffness based on the force
error has been proposed in [4]. The shape and the local surface
normals of the environment are estimated in [5]. The adaptive
environmental parameters estimation has been studied in [6]
to actively track the reference force based on a position-based
impedance controller. The force tracking has been implemented by
defining the control gains analytically based on the estimation of
the stiffness using an Extended Kalman Filter in [7]. Some authors
proposed an intelligent force control algorithm using a neural
network to compensate for uncertainties [8]. Fuzzy-neuro tech-
niques have been used for force control of unknown objects [9].
However, the identification process often has errors. Sometimes
the past information is only used to estimate the environment
information, these factors can also lead to the existence of force
tracking error. In practice, the experiment in [1] has showed that
the force can be tracked accurately only under the circumstance
that the estimated environment location is within a certain limi-
tation. (2) Direct adjustment of reference trajectory. The basic idea
is to update the reference trajectory directly by prior information.
The model-reference adaptive control (MRAC) has been used to
generate the reference location on-line as a function of the force
tracking error in [4]. The prediction was also used to generate
the reference trajectory according to the force error [10,11], such
as an Extended Kalman Filter is used to estimate. There is of-
ten a large force tracking error using this method, because the
dynamic physical properties of the robot and environment are
often ignored. (3) Variable impedance control. The basic idea is to
adjust the impedance parameters according to the force feedback
information. Recently, many researchers have studied the benefit
of variable impedance control during the task [12,13]. Variable
impedance control has been first demonstrated its stability for
the control system in [14], where a state-independent stability
constraint that relates the stiffness and the time derivative of the
stiffness to the damping have been proposed. Several works have
addressed the problem of the specification of varying impedance
through learning by demonstration [13,15], reinforcement learn-
ing [12,16,17]. Using the learning methods, it requires a huge
amount of training data, which is not always convenient to collect
for the force tracking systems.
In summary, the first category and the second category of ap-
proaches are based on the estimation and prediction of the envi-
ronment location. Therefore, the force tracking error is unavoid-
able. What is worse, the dynamic physical properties of contact are
always ignored. The third category considers the dynamic physical
properties of contact, but the learning method requires a lot of data,
it is not suitable for real-time system. The optimal control [18–23]
like adaptive control and adaptive neural network are robust to
uncertain systems and dynamically changing systems, the system
can be achieved according to adjust the gains by the feedback
information. To the best of our knowledge, no research has been
reported to combine adaptive control and variable impedance
control. Based on the existing problems of the above research,
a new force tracking strategy which is called adaptive variable
impedance control is proposed. It combines the idea of variable
impedance control with the advantage of the adaptive control at
the same time. The adaptive variable impedance control considers
the dynamic physical properties of contact, and it stabilizes the
system just by adjusting the gains on-line using the force feedback.
This paper aims at introducing the adaptive variable impedance
control for dynamic force tracking in uncertain environment. The
remaining of this paper is organized as follows. The interaction
model of the system and the basic position-based impedance
control with force tracking strategy are introduced in Section 2.
The adaptive variable impedance control and the control block
diagram are given in Section 3. The stability and convergence of
the proposed control algorithm are analyzed in Section 4. A series
of experiments are carried out in Section 5, followed by conclusions
in Section 6.
2. System model and control
In this section, the interaction model of the system used in this
paper is discussed. Then position-based impedance control with
force tracking strategy is presented.
2.1. Model of robot and environment
For modeling the contact force of the robot and environment,
the robot is presented by a second order mass–spring–damper
system, the environment is also presented by a second order mass–
spring–damper system as in other literatures. But in this paper, to
begin with a simple case, let us consider the environment to be
rigid. Denote ke the stiffness of the environment, m, b and k the
mass, damping and stiffness of the robot end-effector, respectively.
Let f be the current contact force applied by the robot to the
environment once a contact between both is established.
The contact process between the robot and the environment
can be illustrated as two phases, as shown in Fig. 1. In the first
phase, the robot is approaching toward the environment. While in
the second phase, the end-effector is in contact with the environ-
ment. Fig. 2 shows a contact force diagram of a robot when it comes
in contact with the environment.
As shown in Fig. 2, from 0 ∼ t1, there is no contact during the
free-space. From t2 ∼ t3, the system will be stable after a process
of collision. Collision is inevitable, however the collision time is
transient and strongly nonlinear.
2.2. Position-based impedance control for force tracking
In the majority of the literature, force-based impedance control
for force tracking has been widely studied. However, most com-
mercialized robots emphasize the accuracy of position trajectory
following, and do not provide a force control mode. Therefore,
force-based impedance control was impossible on these robots.
Alternatively, position-based impedance control is recognized as

56 J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65
Fig. 1. System model of robot and rigid environment: (a) without any contact
between robot and environment, (b) critical point when contact occurs but f = 0
and (c) contact with f ̸= 0.
Fig. 2. The diagram of robot and environment contact force.
a practical approach to achieve compliant interaction of position-
controlled manipulators. The position-based impedance control
schematic for force tracking is shown in Fig. 3.
In Fig. 3, Xr , Xc and Xm represent for the reference position
trajectory, the commanded position trajectory which is sent to the
robot, the measured position trajectory, respectively. Assuming
that Xc = Xm in the position control mode, the position perturba-
tion due to the contact force can be represented as E = Xm − Xr =
Xc − Xr . Xe refers to the location of the environment. Because
the environment is assumed to be rigid, so the environment is
represented by a linear spring with stiffness Ke. The contact force
between the robot and the environment is then simplified as Fe =
Ke(Xe − Xm) = Ke(Xe − Xc ). Denoting Fd the desired contact force,
then the force tracking error is ∆F = Fe − Fd.
Typically, the impedance model is chosen as a linear second-
order system with the transfer-function K (s) = 1/(Ms2 + Bs + K ),
so the dynamical relationship between the force tracking error ∆F
and the position perturbation E can be expressed as
M d2E(t)
dt 2 + B dE(t)
dt
+ KE(t) = ∆F (t) (1)
where M is the mass, B is the damping, K is the stiffness. The
perturbation E is used to modify the reference position trajectory
Xr to produce the commanded trajectory Xc = Xr + E = Xr + ∆F ·
K (s), which is then tracked by the servo driver system.
Each Cartesian variable is independent. Without loss of general-
ity, taking one dimension for example, the force tracking error ∆f
can be written as
∆f = fe − fd = ke(xe − xc ) − fd
= kexe − ke(xr + k(s)∆f ) − fd
(2)
Substituting k(s) = 1/(ms2 + bs + k) into (2), yields
∆f (ms2 + bs + k + ke) =
(ms2 + bs + k)[ke(xe − xr ) − fd]
(3)
The steady-state force tracking error is then obtained from Eq.
(3) as
∆fss = k
k + ke
[ke(xe − xr ) − fd] (4)
From Eq. (4), the reference position must satisfy the following
equation in order to make the force tracking error converge to zero
in the steady state.
xr = xe − fd
ke
(5)
Eq. (5) shows that if the precise location of the environment
xe and the exact value of environment stiffness ke are known, the
reference position trajectory xr could be computed according to
Eq. (5) to exert the desired contact force fd on the environment.
However, in practice the values of xe and ke are not known in
advance. According to the analysis in [4], it is difficult to directly
compensate the environment location xe and the environment
stiffness ke. There will be an infinite steady-state force tracking
error, because the force error always exists.
Based on the above problems, a new adaptive variable
impedance is proposed to realize force tracking in the case of
uncertain environment information in the next section.
Fig. 3. The position-based impedance control schematic.

J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65 57
3. The dynamic force tracking based on adaptive variable
impedance control
This section will address two problems in uncertain environ-
ments. (1) The environment stiffness is unknown or dynamic. (2)
The environment location changes dynamically.
3.1. Unknown environmental stiffness
The following is an analysis of unknown or dynamic variation
of the environmental stiffness. Substituting E = Xc − Xr and
∆F = Fe − Fd into Eq. (1), yields
Fe − Fd = M( ¨Xc − ¨Xr ) + B( ˙Xc − ˙Xr ) + K (Xc − Xr ) (6)
According to the analysis in Section 2, it is difficult to obtain
accurate reference trajectory Xr , because of the unknown environ-
ment information. Therefore, replacing Xr with the initial environ-
ment location Xe, the new impedance equation is then converted
to
Fe − Fd = M( ¨Xc − ¨Xe) + B( ˙Xc − ˙Xe) + K (Xc − Xe) (7)
Now the position perturbation E can be written as E = Xc −
Xe. For simplicity, we take one-dimensional interaction force for
example in the latter analysis. Then Eq. (7) can be expressed as
∆f = fe − fd = m¨e + b˙e + ke (8)
where e = xc − xe.
If the desired force fd = 0, the situation is satisfied ∆fss = 0
when xc = xe. It means robot just come into contact with the
environment, the contact force fe is zero. In this case, Eq. (8) is
always satisfied for any environmental stiffness ke.
If the desired force fd ̸= 0, the desired force fd serves as the driv-
ing force to enable the robot to exert a force on the environment, so
xc ̸= xe, which means ∆fss ̸= 0 when the system is stable. As [24]
shows that setting the stiffnessk to zero will satisfy the ideal steady
state condition in fe = fd for any ke.
So the proposed control law is to set stiffness k = 0, Eq. (8)
yields
∆f = fe − fd = m¨e + b˙e (9)
Substituting fe = ke(xe − xc ) = − kee into Eq. (9), the contact
impedance law is
m¨e + b˙e + kee = −fd (10)
The analysis shows that, even if the environment stiffness ke is
unknown, the proper m and b based on approximation of ke can
be chosen to satisfy Eq. (10), so that when the system is stable, we
have ∆fss = 0.
Therefore, we can conclude that when the environmental stiff-
ness is unknown or dynamic changes, the desired force tracking
effect can be achieved by setting k = 0.
3.2. Dynamic environmental location
The situation of dynamic change of environment location is
analyzed as following. Substituting e = xc − xe into Eq. (9) results
in
fe − fd = m(¨xc − ¨xe) + b(˙xc − ˙xe) (11)
If the operation is on a plane, where ¨xe = ˙xe = 0, we have
∆fss = 0, which means the system is definitely stable.
If the operation is on a slope or a more complex unknown
surface, xe is time-varying, and ˙xe ̸= 0 or ˙xe ̸= 0, ¨xe ̸= 0. So
the environmental location needs to be estimated. Suppose the
estimation of the environment location is ˆxe = xe − δxe. The
position error is then expressed as ˆe = e + δxe. Replacing e with ˆe
in Eq. (9) yields
fe − fd = m¨ˆe + b˙ˆe = m(¨e + δ¨xe) + b(˙e + δ˙xe) (12)
In Eq. (12), fe, fd, ¨ˆe, ˙ˆe are time-varying. In other words, the force
tracking error exists at any time with the previously-used control
law. In order to obtain ∆fss = 0, an adaptive variable impedance
control is introduced to compensate the error of time variation.
Considering the stability of the system, the damping coefficient in
the impedance model is adjusted, but it is not recommended to
modify the mass coefficient because it is easy to cause the system
to oscillate. So the adaptive variable impedance law is proposed as
fe(t) − fd(t) = m¨ˆe(t) + (b + ∆b(t))˙ˆe(t) (13)
∆b(t) is adjusted online according to the force error, having the
form as
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
∆b(t) = b
˙ˆe(t)
Φ(t)
Φ(t) = Φ(t − λ) + σ fd(t − λ) − fe(t − λ)
b
(14)
where λ is the sampling period of the controller andσ is the update
rate.
For convenient applications in the control of industrial robots,
Eq. (13) can be converted to its discrete format as
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
¨Xc (t) = ¨Xe(t) + 1
M
[∆F (t) − B(t)( ˙Xc (t − 1) − ˙Xe(t))]
˙Xc (t) = ˙Xc (t − 1) + ¨Xc (t)T
Xc (t) = Xc (t − 1) + ˙Xc (t)T
(15)
where T is the system communication cycle between the robot
controller and the servo driver.
The proposed force tracking structure is shown in Fig. 4.
4. Stability and convergence of adaptive variable impedance
law
The form of adaptive variable impedance is given in Eqs. (13)
and (14). The constraint conditions for the stability of adaptive
variable impedance are given below, and the force tracking error
is proved to be zero when the system is asymptotically stable.
Substituting Eq.(14) into Eq. (13), yields
fe(t) − fd(t) = m¨ˆe(t) + b˙ˆe(t) + bΦ(t − λ)
+ σ [fd(t − λ) − fe(t − λ)]
= m[¨e(t) + δ¨xe(t)] + b[˙e(t) + δ˙xe(t)]
+ bΦ(t − λ) + σ [fd(t − λ) − fe(t − λ)]
(16)
Reorganizing Eq. (16) yields,
m¨e(t) + b˙e(t) + bΦ(t − λ) − [fe(t) − fd(t)]
+ σ [fd(t − λ) − fe(t − λ)]
= −mδ¨xe(t) − bδ˙xe(t)
(17)
According to the stiffness model between the robot and the
environment, which is fe = ke(xe − xc ) = −kee, it becomes
{
˙e = − ˙fe/ke
¨e = − ¨fe/ke
(18)
Substituting Eq. (18) into Eq. (17), yields
−m¨fe(t) − b˙fe(t) + bkeΦ(t − λ) − ke[fe(t) − fd(t)]
+ σ ke [fd(t − λ) − fe(t − λ)] = −mkeδ¨xe(t) − bkeδ˙xe(t)
(19)

58 J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65
Fig. 4. The adaptive variable impedance control schematic.
Let ˆfe(t) = keδxe(t), and then Eq. (19) could be represented as
m¨fd(t) − m¨fe(t) + b˙fd(t) − b˙fe(t) + bkeΦ(t − λ)
+ σ ke [fd(t − λ) − fe(t − λ)] − ke[fe(t) − fd(t)]
= m¨fd(t) − mkeδ¨xe(t) + b˙fd(t) − bkeδ˙xe(t)
= m¨fd(t) − m¨ˆf e(t) + b˙fd(t) − b˙ˆf e(t)
(20)
Marking c(t) = fd(t) − fe(t) and r(t) = fd(t) − ˆfe(t), rewrite Eq.
(20) as
m¨c + b˙c + bkeΦ(t − λ) + σ kec(t − λ) + kec = m¨r + b˙r (21)
According to the principle of dispersion, n elements of Φ series
can be expanded as [24]
bΦ(t − λ) = bΦ(t − (n + 1)λ)
+ σ c(t − (n + 1)λ) + · · · + σ c(t − 2λ)
(22)
In general, set the initial value of adaptive compensation Φ(t −
(n + 1)λ) = 0, so Eq. (21) can be rewritten as
m¨c + b˙c + kec + σ ke(c(t − (n + 1)λ)+
. . . + c(t − λ)) = m¨r + b˙r
(23)
According to the delay property of the Laplace transformI[f (t −
τ )] = e−τ sF (s), the following equation is obtained by Eq. (23).
c(s)
r(s)
= ms2 + bs
ms2 + bs + ke + σ ke(e−(n+1)λs + · · · + e−λs)
(24)
The stability of Eq. (24) can be assured by the characteristic Eq.
(25)
ms2 + bs + ke + σ ke(e−(n+1)λs + · · · + e−λs) = 0 (25)
Under the assumption that n is a sufficiently large number, it
can be expressed as
∞∑
n=1
e−λns = e−λs
1 − e−λs (26)
When the sampling rate λ is sufficient, the delayed term can be
approximated as e−λs ≃ 1 − λs by Taylor expansion. Eq. (25) can
be written as
λms3 + λbs2 + keλ(1 − σ )s + σ ke = 0 (27)
According to the Routh criterion, we get the Routh array as
illustrated in Eq. (28). To ensure the stability of the system, the
coefficients of the first column and the coefficients of the charac-
teristic equation must be positive, representing as in Eq. (29).
s3 λm k eλ(1 − σ )
s2 λb σ ke
s1 λbkeλ(1 − σ ) − λmσ ke
λb
0
s0 σ ke 0
(28)
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
λbkeλ(1 − σ ) − λmσ ke
λb
> 0
keλ(1 − σ ) > 0
σ ke > 0
(29)
Simplifying Eq. (29), yields
0 < σ < λb
m + λb
(30)
For a stable system, the steady-state error ess defined based on
the Laplace transform. For convergence, the steady-state error ess
can be obtained as
ess = lim
t→∞
e(t) = lim
s→0
sE(s) = lim
s→0
s(c(s) − r(s))
= lim
s→0
s[ ms2 + bs
ms2 + bs + ke + σ ke(e−(n−1)λs + · · · + e−λs)
r(s) − r(s)]
(31)
When the input is a step function with the form as r(s) = (1/s).
Eq. (31) yields
ess = lim
s→0
s(c(s) − r(s)) = −1 (32)
According to the Eq. (32), the following conclusion can be
drawn.
lim
s→0
sc(s) = 0 (33)
lim
t→∞
c(t) = 0 (34)
Therefore, when t → ∞ , fe → fd. The contact force between
robot and environment converges to the dynamic desired force.
Actually, even if r(s) is not a constant, like a sine function as in
experiment, we can always prove that the tracking error goes to
zero.
5. Simulations and experiments
To verify the proposed force tracking approach and analysis,
a series of simulation and experimental studies are conducted

J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65 59
Fig. 5. The block diagram of simulation.
and presented in this section. The performance of the proposed
schemes is first tested by simulations. The simulations include a
variety of force tracking scenarios which basically cover most of
the actual situations. Three experimental studies are carried out to
test the feasibility of practical application.
5.1. Simulation studies
In the following simulation experiments, the classical constant
impedance control as shown in Eq. (11) and the adaptive variable
impedance control as shown in Eqs. (13) and (14) are tested and
compared in a variety of uncertain environments. The simulation
environment is based on Matlab Simulink which including two
parts: the impedance control and the model of contact force. The
block diagram of simulation is shown in Fig. 5, the simulation does
not consider any disturbance.
5.1.1. Force tracking on planes
If the contact environment is a plane, then it satisfies ˙xe =
¨xe = 0. Assume that m = 1, k = 0, xe = 0.1 m, fd = 5 N.
Set xc to a value bigger than xe, for instance xc = 0.2 m in
this paper. In other words, the robot is not in contact with the
environment in the beginning. In order to test the robustness of
the Eq. (11) to uncertain environment stiffness, abruptly changing
the environment stiffness to be
ke =
⎧
⎨
⎩
1000 (N/m), 0 ≤ t ≤ 6
3000 (N/m), 6 ≤ t ≤ 8
5000 (N/m), 8 ≤ t ≤ 10
(35)
Figs. 6 and 7 show us the result of position tracking and force
tracking on a plane with the fixed impedance control, respectively.
The damping coefficient b = 42 can obtain the ideal effect. Fig. 6
shows that robot moves from free space to constrained space
between 0 ∼ 0.4 s. Once the end-effector contacts with the
environment, it can be seen from Fig. 7 that when the environment
stiffness changes, the desired force can be tracked after a brief force
adjustment.
The above experimental results show that constant impedance
control is robust to the varying environmental stiffness. Therefore,
the classical constant impedance control can achieve good force
tracking effect when the robot operates on a plane or the environ-
ment stiffness varies.
5.1.2. Force tracking on slope surface
If the contact environment is a slope surface, then it satisfies
˙xe ̸= 0, ¨xe = 0. This experiment is to compare the adaptability
of classical impedance control and adaptive variable impedance
control to the dynamic changes of the environment, so set the
Fig. 6. Position tracking on planes based on constant impedance control.
Fig. 7. Force tracking on planes based on constant impedance control.
initial location xc = xm = 0, ke = 5000 (N /m), fd = 50 N, the
other assumptions are the same.
Figs. 8–11 show us the simulation results of position and force
tracking when the robot operating on a slope flat surface with the

60 J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65
Fig. 8. Position tracking on a slope surface based on constant impedance control.
Fig. 9. Force tracking on a slope surface based on constant impedance control.
Fig. 10. Position tracking on a slope surface based on variable impedance control.
constant impedance control and the adaptive variable impedance
control, respectively.
Fig. 11. Force tracking on a slope surface based on variable impedance control.
Fig. 12. Position tracking on a sine surface based on constant impedance control.
For the constant impedance control, the damping coefficient
b = 60 can be used to obtain the stable force tracking value. But
Fig. 9 shows that the stable value is ˆfd = 65 N, there is a large error
in expectation. For the adaptive variable impedance control, the
initial damping coefficient b = 100 and the update rate σ = 0.5
can be used to obtain the stable force tracking value, and Fig. 11
shows that the adaptive variable impedance control can achieve
the desired stable value after the short adaptive adjustment.
By the above experimental results, we can conclude that al-
though the constant impedance control can achieve a stable value,
it cannot track the desired force. Therefore, the adaptive variable
impedance control outperforms the constant impedance control.
5.1.3. Force tracking on sine surface
If the contact environment is a sine surface, then it satisfies
˙xe ̸= 0, ¨xe ̸= 0, the other assumptions are the same. Figs. 12–15
show us the simulation results of position and force tracking when
the robot operating on the sine surface.
Fig. 13 shows that whatever b is chosen, the force tracking error
always exists, and the estimated force trends sideways. Hence, the
force tracking in this case is non-convergent. But Fig. 15 shows that
the adaptive variable impedance control can achieve the desired
stable value after the short adaptive adjustment.

J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65 61
Fig. 13. Force tracking on a sine surface based on constant impedance control.
Fig. 14. Position tracking on a sine surface based on variable impedance control.
Fig. 15. Force tracking on a sine surface based on variable impedance control.
Fig. 16. Position tracking on a complex surface based on variable impedance
control.
Fig. 17. Force tracking on a complex surface based on variable impedance control.
Fig. 18. Position tracking on a complex surface based on variable impedance control
where fd is time varying.

62 J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65
Fig. 19. Force tracking on a complex surface based on variable impedance control
where fd is time varying.
5.1.4. Force tracking on complex surface
The aim of this experiment is to test the robustness of the adap-
tive impedance control to the complex surface for force tracking.
Figs. 16 and 17 show us the simulation results of position and force
tracking when the robot operating on the complex surface based on
adaptive variable impedance control. It shows that force tracking
error is zero when the system is stable.
Furthermore, in order to test whether adaptive variable
impedance control can adapt to the dynamic desired force, so fd
is set a time-varying series. Figs. 18 and 19 show us the simulation
results of position and force tracking when the robot operating on
the complex surface based on adaptive variable impedance control
where fd is time varying. The simulation results show the force
tracking error is zero when the system is stable.
From the above four simulation experiments, we could con-
clude that (1) For the flat surface, even if the environment stiff-
ness is uncertain, the constant impedance control can achieve
the desired force tracking effect. (2) But for the slope or more
complicated unknown surface, the constant impedance control
cannot achieve the desired force tracking. (3) The adaptive variable
impedance control not only can achieve the desired force tracking
Fig. 20. Hardware architecture of test-bed.
Fig. 21. Experimental setup — flat surface.

J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65 63
Fig. 22. Experimental setup — slope surface.
Fig. 23. Experimental setup — curved surface.
performance on whatever surface, but also can adapt the dynamic
desired force.
Therefore, the simulation experiments show that the adaptive
variable impedance control can achieve very good tracking effect
in uncertain environment.
5.2. Experimental studies
To demonstrate the performance of the proposed algorithm, ex-
periments were conducted using the test-bed as shown in Fig. 20.
The test platform consists of four parts, self-developed open con-
troller, servo driver, an ESTUN ER16 industrial manipulator and
an Optoforce HEX-70-XE-1000N wrist force sensor (The nominal
capacity of Fz is 1000N, the deformation is 1 mm and the accuracy is
3%FS). The servo driver communicates with the controller through
EtherCAT. The force sensor and the controller are communicated
through UDP, both of the communication cycles are 5 ms. At the
end-effector of the robot is a pulley-based device for tracking the
contact position and force accurately.
To confirm simulation studies, three experiments were con-
ducted to test the feasibility of the proposed algorithm as show
from Figs. 21 to 23. The flat and slope surface are hard desk surface
as show in Fig. 21 and Fig. 22. The complex surface is a blend curved
surface which includes a sine surface and a flat surface as show
in Fig. 23, the sine surface is rigid, and the flat surface is plastic,
there is a groove in the connection between the sine surface and
the flat surface. The exact location and stiffness of each surface are
uncertain. Consider the robot moving in the negative z direction
onto a surface, and then moving 40 cm along the surface in the y
direction with fd = −12 N in z direction.
The constant impedance control strategy is tested in the first ex-
periment, and the adaptive variable impedance control algorithm

64 J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65
Fig. 24. Results of constant impedance control — flat surface.
Fig. 25. Results of adaptive variable impedance control — slope surface.
is tested in the second and third experiments. The results of the
experiments are shown from Figs. 24 to 26. In the initial state,
the end-effector moves from the free space to a point beyond the
surface. fd is used to drive the robot in contact with the surface.
In contact with the surface, the desired force is tracked smoothly
after a brief adjustment.
Fig. 24 shows that once the end-effector contacts with the
surface, the initial overshoot is happening, and the force settles
to −12 N in approximately 15 s. Fig. 25 shows that after a brief
force adjustment, the tracking is stable at −12 N in approximately
15s. Fig. 26 shows that from 10 s to 27 s the adaptive variable
impedance control can track the curved surface although the force
has a bit error. From 27 s to 28 s, the end-effector through the
groove in the junction between the sine surface and flat surface.
At time 28 s, the environment stiffness changes. After a brief
adjustment from 28 s to 31 s, the force can be tracked. In the
whole experiments, the initial damping coefficient b = 100 and
the update rate σ = 0.5 are used to obtain the stable force tracking
value.
Fig. 26. Results of adaptive variable impedance control — curved surface.
6. Conclusion
Force tracking is one of the most important issue in contact
operation. A new adaptive variable impedance control for dynamic
force tracking in uncertain environment was proposed.
Two key factors for the uncertain environment were analyzed:
unknown environmental stiffness and dynamic environmental lo-
cation. The dynamic physical properties of the robot and the envi-
ronment were modeled. A modified impedance control law which
was based on the traditional impedance control was improved
to adapt any environmental stiffness. In order to solve the prob-
lem of the dynamic environmental location, an adaptive variable
impedance control strategy based on force feedback by adjusting
impedance parameters to compensate for the location error was
studied.
To verify the feasibility of the proposed algorithm, both simu-
lation and experimental studies were conducted and tested. Test
results showed that the constant impedance control only can be
applied to the flat surface force tracking, but the adaptive variable
impedance control can be used to a variety of uncertain environ-
ments such as slope surface or another complex unknown surface.
The proposed algorithm was not only used to track static desired
force, but also can be used to dynamic desired force tracking. It can
be extended to a lot of situations involving force tracking, and it
provides a more effective solution to the contact operation.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China under Grant No. 61503076, 61175113. Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of Jiangsu Province under Grant No. BK20150624.
Open Project Program of the Key Laboratory of Measurement and
Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education,
Southeast University under Grant NO. MCCSE2014B02.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found
online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2018.01.009.

J. Duan et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 102 (2018) 54–65 65
References
[1] B. Siciliano, L. Villani, Robot Force Control, Springer, Berlin, 2000.
[2] N. Hogan, Impedance control - an approach to manipulation. I - Theory. II -
Implementation. III C Applications, J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 107 (1) (1985)
1–24.
[3] M.H. Raibert, J.J. Craig, Hybrid position/force control of robot manipulators, J.
Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 103 (2) (1982) 126–133.
[4] H. Seraji, R. Colbaugh, Force tracking in impedance control, Int. J. Robot. Res.
16 (1) (1993) 97–117.
[5] L. Wang, Z. Chen, P. Chalasani, et al., Updating virtual fixtures from explo-
ration data in force-controlled model-based telemanipulation, in: ASME 2016
International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and
Information in Engineering Conference, 2016, V05AT07A031.
[6] X. Zhang, M.B. Khamesee, Adaptive force tracking control of a magnetically
navigated microrobot in uncertain environments, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
tronics PP (99) (2017) 1–1.
[7] L. Roveda, N. Iannacci, F. Vicentini, et al., Optimal impedance force-tracking
control design with impact formulation for interaction tasks, IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett. 1 (1) (2017) 130–136.
[8] S. Jung, T.C. Hsia, Robust neural force control scheme under uncertainties in
robot dynamics and unknown environment, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 47 (2)
(2002) 403–412.
[9] K. Kiguchi, T. Fukuda, Position/force control of robot manipulators for geomet-
rically unknown objects using fuzzy neural networks, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.
47 (3) (2000) 641–649.
[10] B. Baigzadehnoe, Z. Rahmani, A. Khosravi, et al., On position/force tracking
control problem of cooperative robot manipulators using adaptive fuzzy back-
stepping approach, ISA Trans. 70 (2017) 432.
[11] Z. Deng, H. Jin, Y. Hu, et al., Fuzzy force control and state detection in vertebral
lamina milling, Mechatronics 35 (2016) 1–10.
[12] J. Buchli, F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, et al., Learning variable impedance control, Int.
J. Robot. Res. 30 (7) (2011) 820–833.
[13] K. Kronander, A. Billard, A online learning of varying stiffness through physical
human–robot interaction, in: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, IEEE, 2012, pp. 1842–1849.
[14] K. Kronander, A. Billard, Stability considerations for variable impedance con-
trol, IEEE Trans. Robot. 32 (5) (2016) 1298–1305.
[15] S. Calinon, I. Sardellitti, D.G. Caldwell, Learning-based control strategy for safe
human–robot interaction exploiting task and robot redundancies, 6219 (1)
(2010) 249–254.
[16] P. Kormushev, S. Calinon, D.G. Caldwell, Robot motor skill coordination with
EM-based reinforcement learning, in: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, IEEE, 2010, pp. 3232–3237.
[17] N. Roy, P. Newman, S. Srinivasa, Tendon-Driven Variable Impedance Control
Using Reinforcement Learning, MIT Press, 2012, p. 504.
[18] D. Braun, M. Howard, S. Vijayakumar, Optimal variable stiffness control: For-
mulation and application to explosive movement tasks, Auton. Robots 33 (3)
(2012) 237–253.
[19] M. Garabini, A. Passaglia, F. Belo, et al., Optimality principles in variable
stiffness control: The VSA hammer, in: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, IEEE, 2011, pp. 3770–3775.
[20] J.R. Medina, D. Sieber, S. Hirche, Risk-sensitive interaction control in uncer-
tain manipulation tasks, in: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, IEEE, 2013, pp. 502–507.
[21] L. Zhang, Z. Li, C. Yang, Adaptive neural network based variable stiffness
control of uncertain robotic systems using disturbance observer, IEEE Trans.
Ind. Electron. PP (99) (2017) 1–1.
[22] Z. Chen, Z. Li, C.L. Chen, Disturbance observer-based fuzzy control of uncertain
MIMO mechanical systems with input nonlinearities and its application to
robotic exoskeleton, IEEE Trans. Cybern. 47 (4) (2016) 984–994.
[23] Z. Chen, Z. Li, C. Chen, Adaptive neural control of uncertain MIMO nonlinear
systems with state and input constraints, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 28 (6)
(2017) 1318.
[24] S. Jung, T.C. Hsia, R.G. Bonitz, Force tracking impedance control of robot
manipulators under unknown environment, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol.
12 (3) (2004) 474–483.
Duan Jinjun, Ph.D. candidate at the School of Automation,
Southeast University, P.R. China. He received the Bachelor
degree and the Master degree from Taiyuan University
of Technology, Taiyuan, China, in 2007 and 2011, respec-
tively, both in Computer Science. His research interest
covers intelligent control system, position/force control,
multiple robots cooperation and artificial intelligence.
Gan Yahui , Lecturer at the School of Automation, South-
east University, Nanjing, China. He received the Bachelor
degree from Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 2007,
and the Ph.D. degree from Southeast University, Nanjing,
China, in 2014. His research interest covers intelligent
robot welding control and multiple robots cooperation.
Chen Ming, is currently a graduate student at the School of
Automation, Southeast University, P.R. China. He received
his bachelor degree from Anhui University of Technology
in 2010. His research interest covers multiple robots coop-
eration and machine learning.
Dai Xianzhong , Professor at the School of Automation,
Southeast University, P.R. China. He received his Ph.D.
degree from Tsinghua University, P. R. China, in 1986. His
research interest covers power system control, artificial
intelligence and robot system.