                                                .


                                                                       Smart “Predict, then Optimize”
                                                                                            Adam N. Elmachtoub
arXiv:1710.08005v5 [math.OC] 19 Nov 2020




                                           Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research and Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York,
                                                                                     NY 10027, adam@ieor.columbia.edu

                                                                                                   Paul Grigas
                                                     Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720,
                                                                                               pgrigas@berkeley.edu


                                                 Many real-world analytics problems involve two significant challenges: prediction and optimization. Due to
                                                 the typically complex nature of each challenge, the standard paradigm is predict-then-optimize. By and large,
                                                 machine learning tools are intended to minimize prediction error and do not account for how the predictions
                                                 will be used in the downstream optimization problem. In contrast, we propose a new and very general
                                                 framework, called Smart “Predict, then Optimize” (SPO), which directly leverages the optimization problem
                                                 structure, i.e., its objective and constraints, for designing better prediction models. A key component of our
                                                 framework is the SPO loss function which measures the decision error induced by a prediction.
                                                    Training a prediction model with respect to the SPO loss is computationally challenging, and thus we
                                                 derive, using duality theory, a convex surrogate loss function which we call the SPO+ loss. Most importantly,
                                                 we prove that the SPO+ loss is statistically consistent with respect to the SPO loss under mild conditions.
                                                 Our SPO+ loss function can tractably handle any polyhedral, convex, or even mixed-integer optimization
                                                 problem with a linear objective. Numerical experiments on shortest path and portfolio optimization problems
                                                 show that the SPO framework can lead to significant improvement under the predict-then-optimize paradigm,
                                                 in particular when the prediction model being trained is misspecified. We find that linear models trained
                                                 using SPO+ loss tend to dominate random forest algorithms, even when the ground truth is highly nonlinear.

                                                 Key words : prescriptive analytics; data-driven optimization; machine learning; linear regression



                                           1.       Introduction
                                           In many real-world analytics applications of operations research, a combination of both
                                           machine learning and optimization are used to make decisions. Typically, the optimization
                                           model is used to generate decisions, while a machine learning tool is used to generate a
                                           prediction model that predicts key unknown parameters of the optimization model. Due to
                                           the inherent complexity of both tasks, a broad purpose approach that is often employed in
                                           analytics practice is the predict-then-optimize paradigm.
                                                For example, consider a vehicle routing problem that may be solved several times a day.
                                           First, a previously trained prediction model provides predictions for the travel time on all
                                           edges of a road network based on current traﬃc, weather, holidays, time, etc. Then, an

                                                                                                         1
2                                                            Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



optimization solver provides near-optimal routes using the predicted travel times as input.
We emphasize that most solution systems for real-world analytics problems involve some
component of both prediction and optimization (see Angalakudati et al. (2014), Chan et al.
(2012), Deo et al. (2015), Gallien et al. (2015), Cohen et al. (2017), Besbes et al. (2015),
Mehrotra et al. (2011), Chan et al. (2013), Ferreira et al. (2015) for recent examples and
recent expositions by Simchi-Levi (2013), den Hertog and Postek (2016), Deng et al. (2018),
Mišić and Perakis (2020)). Except for a few limited options, machine learning tools do not
eﬀectively account for how the predictions will be used in a downstream optimization prob-
lem. In this paper, we provide a general framework called Smart “Predict, then Optimize”
(SPO) for training prediction models that eﬀectively utilize the structure of the nominal opti-
mization problem, i.e., its constraints and objective. Our SPO framework is fundamentally
designed to generate prediction models that aim to minimize decision error, not prediction
error.
    One key beneﬁt of our SPO approach is that it maintains the decision paradigm of sequen-
tially predicting and then optimizing. However, when training our prediction model, the
structure of the nominal optimization problem is explicitly used. The quality of a prediction
is not measured based on prediction error such as least squares loss or other popular loss
functions. Instead, in the SPO framework, the quality of a prediction is measured by the
decision error. That is, suppose a prediction model is trained using historical feature data
(x1 , . . . , xn ) and associated parameter data (c1 , . . . , cn ). Let (ĉ1 , . . . , ĉn ) denote the predic-
tions of the parameters under the trained model. The least squares (LS) loss, for example,
measures error with the squared norm kci − ĉi k22 , completely ignoring the decisions induced
by the predictions. In contrast, the SPO loss is the true cost of the decision induced by ĉi
minus the optimal cost under the true parameter ci . In the context of vehicle routing, the
SPO loss measures the extra travel time incurred due to solving the routing problem on the
predicted, rather than true, edge cost parameters.
    In this paper, we focus on predicting unknown parameters of a contextual stochastic
optimization problem, where the parameters appear linearly in the objective function, i.e.,
the cost vector of any linear, convex, or integer optimization problem. The core of our SPO
framework is a new loss function for training prediction models. Since the SPO loss function
is diﬃcult to work with, signiﬁcant eﬀort revolves around deriving a surrogate loss function,
SPO+, that is convex and therefore can be optimized eﬃciently. To show the validity of
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                         3

the surrogate SPO+ loss, we prove a highly desirable statistical consistency property, and
show it performs well empirically compared to standard predict-then-optimize approaches.
In essence, we prove that the function that minimizes the Bayes risk associated to the SPO+
loss is the regression function E[c|x], which also minimizes the Bayes risk of the SPO loss
(under mild assumptions). Interestingly, E[c|x] also minimizes the Bayes risk associated to
the LS loss under the same conditions. Thus, SPO+ and LS (or any convex combination of
the two) are essentially on “equal footing” – they are both theoretically valid (consistent) and
computationally tractable choices for the loss function. However, when the ultimate goal is
to solve a downstream optimization task, the SPO+ loss is the natural choice as it is tailored
to the optimization problem and works signiﬁcantly better in practice than LS.
  Empirically, we observe that even when the prediction task is challenging due to model
misspeciﬁcation, the SPO framework can still yield near-optimal decisions. We note that
a fundamental property of the SPO framework is the requirement that the prediction is
directly “plugged in” to the downstream optimization problem. An alternative procedure
may alter the decision making process in some way, such as by adding robustness or by
taking into account the entire dataset (instead of just the prediction). A strong advantage
of our SPO approach is that it has good performance even when the naive prediction prob-
lem is challenging, see the illustrative example in Section 3.1. Another advantage is that
the downstream optimization problem is typically more computationally tractable and more
attractive to practitioners than a more complex alternative procedure. On the other hand,
alternative decision making procedures may provide other advantages, such as improved gen-
eralization performance via the introduction of bias and/or robustness. However, designing
such procedures is more challenging in the presence of contextual data and combining them
with the SPO approach would be worthwhile of future research. Overall, we believe our SPO
framework provides a clear foundation for designing operations-driven machine learning tools
that can be leveraged in real-world optimization settings.
  Our contributions may be summarized as follows:
1. We ﬁrst formally deﬁne a new loss function, which we call the SPO loss, that measures the
   error in predicting the cost vector of a nominal optimization problem with linear, convex,
   or integer constraints. The loss corresponds to the suboptimality gap – with respect to the
   true/historical cost vector – due to implementing a possibly incorrect decision induced
   by the predicted cost vector. Unfortunately, the SPO loss function can be nonconvex and
4                                                     Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



    discontinuous in the predictions, implying that training ML models under the SPO loss
    may be challenging.
2. Given the intractability of the SPO loss function, we develop a surrogate loss function
    which we call the SPO+ loss. This surrogate loss function is derived using a sequence
    of steps motivated by duality theory (Proposition 2), a data scaling approximation, and
    a ﬁrst-order approximation. The resulting SPO+ loss function is convex in the predic-
    tions (Proposition 3), which allows us to design an algorithm based on stochastic gradi-
    ent descent for minimizing SPO+ loss (Proposition 8). Moreover, when training a linear
    regression model to predict the objective coeﬃcients of a linear program, only a linear
    optimization problem needs be solved to minimize the SPO+ loss (Proposition 7).
3. We prove a fundamental connection to classical machine learning under a very simple
    and special instance of our SPO framework. Namely, under this instance the SPO loss is
    exactly the 0-1 classiﬁcation loss (Proposition 1) and the SPO+ loss is exactly the hinge
    loss (Proposition 4). The hinge loss is the basis of the popular SVM method and is a
    surrogate loss to approximately minimize the 0-1 loss, and thus our framework generalizes
    this concept to a very wide family of optimization problems with constraints.
4. We prove a key consistency result of the SPO+ loss function (Theorem 1, Proposition 5,
    Proposition 6), which further motivates its use. Namely, under full distributional knowl-
    edge, minimizing the SPO+ loss function is in fact equivalent to minimizing the SPO
    loss if two mild conditions hold: the distribution of the cost vector (given the features)
    is continuous and symmetric about its mean. For example, these assumptions are satis-
    ﬁed by the standard Gaussian noise approximation. This consistency property is widely
    regarded as an essential property of any surrogate loss function across the statistics and
    machine learning literature. For example, the famous hinge loss and logistic loss functions
    are consistent with the 0-1 classiﬁcation loss.
5. Finally, we validate our framework through numerical experiments on the shortest path
    and portfolio optimization problem. We test our SPO framework against standard predict-
    then-optimize approaches, and evaluate the out of sample performance with respect to
    the SPO loss. Generally, the value of our SPO framework increases as the degree of model
    misspeciﬁcation increases. This is precisely due to the fact the SPO framework makes
    “better” wrong predictions, essentially “tricking” the optimization problem into ﬁnding
    near-optimal solutions. Remarkably, a linear model trained using SPO+ even dominates a
    state-of-the-art random forests algorithm, even when the ground truth is highly nonlinear.
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                        5

1.1.   Applications
Settings where the input parameters (cost vectors) of an optimization problem need to
be predicted from contextual (feature) data are numerous. Let us now highlight a few, of
potentially many, application areas for the SPO framework.
  Vehicle Routing. In numerous applications, the cost of each edge of a graph needs to be
predicted before making a routing decision. The cost of an edge typically corresponds to the
expected length of time a vehicle would need to traverse the corresponding edge. For clarity,
let us focus on one important example – the shortest path problem. In the shortest path
problem, one is given a weighted directed graph, along with an origin node and destination
node, and the goal is to ﬁnd a sequence of edges from the origin to the destination at minimum
possible cost. A well-known fact is that the shortest path problem can be formulated as a
linear optimization problem, but there are also alternative specialized algorithms such as
the famous Dijkstra’s algorithm (see, e.g., Ahuja et al. (1993)). The data used to predict the
cost of the edges may incorporate the length, speed limit, weather, season, day, and real-time
data from mobile applications such as Google Maps and Waze. Simply minimizing prediction
error may not suﬃce nor be appropriate, as over- or under-predictions have starkly diﬀerent
eﬀects across the network. The SPO framework would ensure that the predicted weights lead
to shortest paths, and would naturally emphasize the estimation of edges that are critical to
this decision. See Figure 3 in Section 2 for an in-depth example.
  Inventory Management. In inventory planning problems such as the economic lot siz-
ing problem (Wagner and Whitin (1958)) or the joint replenishment problem (Levi et al.
(2006)), the demand is the key input into the optimization model. In practical settings,
demand is highly nonstationary and can depend on historical and contextual data such as
weather, seasonality, and competitor sales. The decisions of when to order inventory are
captured by a linear or integer optimization model, depending on the complexity of the
problem. Under a common formulation (see Levi et al. (2006), Cheung et al. (2016)), the
demand appears linearly in the objective, which is convenient for the SPO framework. The
goal is to design a prediction model that maps feature data to demand predictions, which in
turn lead to good inventory plans.
  Portfolio Optimization. In ﬁnancial services applications, the returns of potential invest-
ments need to be somehow estimated from data, and can depend on many features which
typically include historical returns, news, economic factors, social media, and others. In
6                                                  Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



portfolio optimization, the goal is to ﬁnd a portfolio with the highest return subject to a
constraint on the total risk, or variance, of the portfolio. While the returns are often highly
dependent on auxiliary feature information, the variances are typically much more stable
and are not as diﬃcult nor sensitive to predict. Our SPO framework would result in predic-
tions that lead to high performance investments that satisfy the desired level of risk. A least
squares loss approach places higher emphasis on estimating higher valued investments, even
if the corresponding risk may not be ideal. In contrast, the SPO framework directly accounts
for the risk of each investment when training the prediction model.

1.2.   Related Literature
Perhaps the most related work is that of Kao et al. (2009), who also directly seek to train
a machine learning model that minimizes loss with respect to a nominal optimization prob-
lem. In their framework, the nominal problem is an unconstrained quadratic optimization
problem, where the unknown parameters appear in the linear portion of the objective. Their
work does not extend to settings where the nominal optimization problem has constraints,
which our framework does. Donti et al. (2017) proposes a heuristic to address a more general
setting than that of Kao et al. (2009), and also focus on the case of quadratic optimization.
These works also bypass issues of non-uniqueness of solutions of the nominal problem (since
their problem is strongly convex), which must be addressed in our setting to avoid degenerate
prediction models.
    In Ban and Rudin (2019), ML models are trained to directly predict the optimal solution
of a newsvendor problem from data. Tractability and statistical properties of the method are
shown as well as its eﬀectiveness in practice. However, it is not clear how this approach can
be used when there are constraints, since feasibility issues may arise.
    The general approach in Bertsimas and Kallus (2020) considers the problem of accurately
estimating an unknown optimization objective using machine learning models, speciﬁcally
ML models where the predictions can be described as a weighted combination of training
samples, e.g., nearest neighbors and decision trees. In their approach, they estimate the
objective of an instance by applying the same weights generated by the ML model to the
corresponding objective functions of those samples. This approach diﬀers from standard
predict-then-optimize only when the objective function is nonlinear in the unknown param-
eter. Note that the unknown parameters of all the applications mentioned in Section 1.1
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                         7

appear linearly in the objective. Moreover, the training of the ML models does not rely on
the structure of the nominal optimization problem, in contrast to the SPO framework.
  The approach in Tulabandhula and Rudin (2013) relies on minimizing a loss function that
combines the prediction error with the operational cost of the model on an unlabeled dataset.
However, the operational cost is with respect to the predicted parameters, and not the
true parameters. Gupta and Rusmevichientong (2017) consider combining estimation and
optimization in a setting without features/contexts. We also note that our SPO loss, while
mathematically diﬀerent, is similar in spirit to the notion of relative regret introduced in
Lim et al. (2012) in the speciﬁc context of portfolio optimization with historical return data
and without features. Other approaches for ﬁnding near-optimal solutions from data include
operational statistics (Liyanage and Shanthikumar (2005), Chu et al. (2008)), sample aver-
age approximation (Kleywegt et al. (2002), Schütz et al. (2009), Bertsimas et al. (2018b)),
and robust optimization (Bertsimas and Thiele (2006), Bertsimas et al. (2018a), Wang et al.
(2016)). There has also been some recent progress on submodular optimization from samples
(Balkanski et al. (2016, 2017)). These approaches typically do not have a clear way of using
feature data, nor do they directly consider how to train a machine learning model to predict
optimization parameters.
  Another related stream of work is in data-driven inverse optimization, where feasible
or optimal solutions to an optimization problem are observed and the objective func-
tion has to be learned (Aswani et al. (2018), Keshavarz et al. (2011), Chan et al. (2014),
Bertsimas et al. (2015), Esfahani et al. (2018)). In these problems, there is typically a single
unknown objective, and no previous samples of the objective are provided. We also note
there have been recent approaches for regularization (Ban et al. (2018)) and model selection
(Besbes et al. (2010), Den Boer and Sierag (2016), Sen and Deng (2017)) in the context of
an optimization problem.
  Lastly, we note that our framework is related to the general setting of structured pre-
diction (see, e.g., Taskar et al. (2005), Tsochantaridis et al. (2005), Nowozin et al. (2011),
Osokin et al. (2017) and the references therein). Motivated by problems in computer vision
and natural language processing, structured prediction is a version of multiclass classiﬁca-
tion that is concerned with predicting structured objects, such as sequences or graphs, from
feature data. The SPO+ loss is similar in spirit to that of the structured SVM (SSVM)
and is indeed a convex, upper bound on the SPO loss, akin to the SSVM. However, there
8                                                    Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



are fundamental diﬀerences with our approach and the the SSVM approach. In the SSVM
approach, the structured object one would be predicting is the decision w directly from the
feature x (Taskar et al. (2005)). In our setting, we have access to historical data on c which
is richer than observations of decisions, since cost vectors induce optimal decisions naturally.
Under one special case of our framework, we prove that the SPO loss is equivalent to 0/1
loss, while the SPO+ loss is equivalent to the hinge loss. Thus, our framework can be seen as
a type of generalization of the SSVM. Finally, we remark that our derivation of the surrogate
SPO+ loss relies on completely new ideas using duality theory, which help explain the strong
empirical performance.

2.     “Predict, then Optimize” Framework
We now describe the “Predict, then Optimize” framework which is central to many applica-
tions of optimization in practice. Speciﬁcally, we assume that there is a nominal optimization
problem of interest with a linear objective, where the decision variable w ∈ Rd and feasible
region S ⊆ Rd are well-deﬁned and known with certainty. However, the cost vector of the
objective, c ∈ Rd , is not available at the time the decision must be made; instead, an associ-
ated feature vector x ∈ Rp is available. Let Dx be the conditional distribution of c given x.
The goal for the decision maker is to solve, for any new instance characterized by x, is to
solve the contextual stochastic optimization problem

                            min Ec∼Dx [c⊤ w|x] = min Ec∼Dx [c|x]⊤ w .                                 (1)
                            w∈S                   w∈S

     The predict-then-optimize framework relies on using a prediction for Ec∼Dx [c|x], which we
denote by ĉ, and solving the deterministic version of the optimization problem based on ĉ, i.e.,
minw∈S ĉ⊤ w. Our primary interests in this paper concern deﬁning suitable loss functions for
the predict-then-optimize framework, examining their properties, and developing algorithms
for training prediction models using these loss functions.
     We now formally list the key ingredients of our framework:
1. Nominal (downstream) optimization problem, which is of the form

                                   P (c) : z ∗ (c) := min cT w
                                                        w                                             (2)
                                                     s.t. w ∈ S ,

     where w ∈ Rd are the decision variables, c ∈ Rd is the problem data describing the linear
     objective function, and S ⊆ Rd is a nonempty, compact (i.e., closed and bounded), and
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                   9

   convex set representing the feasible region. Since we are focusing on linear optimization
   problems herein, the assumptions that S is convex and closed are without loss of gen-
   erality. Indeed, if S in (2) is instead possibly non-convex or non-closed, then replacing
   S by its closed convex hull does not change the optimal value z ∗ (c) (Lemma 8 in Jaggi
   (2011)). Thus, this basic equivalence for linear optimization problems implies that our
   methodology can be applied to combinatorial and mixed-integer optimization problems,
   which we elaborate further on in Section 3.2. Since S is assumed to be ﬁxed and known
   with certainty, every problem instance can be described by the corresponding cost vec-
   tor, hence the dependence on c in (2). When solving a particular instance where c is
   unknown, a prediction for c is used instead. We assume access to a practically eﬃcient
   optimization oracle, w∗ (c), that returns a solution of P (c) for any input cost vector. For
   instance, if (2) corresponds to a linear, conic, or a mixed-integer optimization problem,
   then a commercial optimization solver or a specialized algorithm suﬃces for w∗ (c).
2. Training data of the form (x1 , c1 ), (x2, c2 ), . . . , (xn , cn ), where xi ∈ X is a feature vector
   representing contextual information associated with ci .
3. A hypothesis class H of cost vector prediction models f : X → Rd , where ĉ := f (x) is
   interpreted as the predicted cost vector associated with feature vector x.
4. A loss function ℓ(·, ·) : Rd × Rd → R+ , whereby ℓ(ĉ, c) quantiﬁes the error in making
   prediction ĉ when the realized (true) cost vector is actually c.
  Given the loss function ℓ(·, ·) and the training data (x1 , c1 ), . . . , (xn , cn ), the empirical risk
minimization (ERM) principle states that we should determine a prediction model f ∗ ∈ H
by solving the optimization problem
                                                        n
                                                 1X
                                           min         ℓ(f (xi), ci ) .                               (3)
                                            f ∈H n
                                                   i=1

Provided with the prediction model f ∗ and given a feature vector x, the predict-then-optimize
decision rule is to choose the optimal solution with respect to the predicted cost vector,
i.e., w∗ (f ∗ (x)). Example 1 in Appendix A contextualizes our framework in the context of a
network optimization problem.
  In standard applications of the “Predict, then Optimize” framework, as in Example 1, the
loss function that is used is completely independent of the nominal optimization problem.
In other words, the underlying structure of the optimization problem P (·) does not factor
into the loss function and therefore the training of the prediction model. For example, when
10                                                     Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



ℓ(ĉ, c) = 21 kĉ − ck22 , this corresponds to the least squares (LS) loss function. Moreover, if H
is a set of linear predictors, then (3) reduces to a standard least squares linear regression
problem. In contrast, our focus in Section 3 is on the construction of loss functions that
measure decision errors in predicting cost vectors by leveraging problem structure.
  Useful Notation. Let p be the dimension of a feature vector, d be the dimension of a decision
vector, and n be the number of training samples. Let W ∗ (c) := arg minw∈S cT w
                                                                          
                                                                                                   denote
the set of optimal solutions of P (·), and let w∗ (·) : Rd → S denote a particular oracle for
solving P (·). That is, w∗ (·) is a ﬁxed deterministic mapping such that w∗ (c) ∈ W ∗ (c). Note
that nothing special is assumed about the mapping w∗ (·), hence w∗ (c) may be regarded as
an arbitrary element of W ∗ (c). Let ξS (·) : Rd → R denote the support function of S, which
is deﬁned by ξS (c) := maxw∈S {cT w}. Since S is compact, ξS (·) is ﬁnite everywhere, the
maximum in the deﬁnition is attained for every c ∈ Rd , and note that ξS (c) = −z ∗ (−c) =
cT w∗ (−c) for all c ∈ Rd . Recall also that ξS (·) is a convex function. For a given convex function
h(·) : Rd → R, recall that g ∈ Rd is a subgradient of h(·) at c ∈ Rd if h(c′ ) ≥ h(c) + g T (c′ − c)
for all c′ ∈ Rd , and the set of subgradients of h(·) at c is denoted by ∂h(c). For two matrices
B1 , B2 ∈ Rd×p , the trace inner product is denoted by B1 • B2 := trace(B1T B2 ). Finally, we
note that the name of the framework is inspired by Farias (2007).

3.   SPO Loss Functions
Herein, we introduce several loss functions that fall into the predict-then-optimize paradigm,
but that are also smart in that they take the nominal optimization problem P (·) into account
when measuring errors in predictions. We refer to these loss functions as Smart “Predict,
then Optimize” (SPO) loss functions. As a starting point, let us consider a true SPO loss
function that exactly measures the excess cost incurred when making a suboptimal decision
due to an imprecise cost vector prediction. Following the PO paradigm, given a cost vector
prediction ĉ, a decision w∗ (ĉ) is implemented based on solving P (ĉ). After the decision w∗ (ĉ)
is implemented, the cost incurred is with respect to the cost vector c that is actually realized.
The excess cost due to the fact that w∗ (ĉ) may be suboptimal with respect to c is then
cT w∗ (ĉ) − z ∗ (c), which we call the SPO loss. In Figure 1, we show how two predicted values
of c with the same prediction error can result in diﬀerent decisions and diﬀerent SPO losses.
In fact, Figure 1 shows that the SPO loss can be 0 when S is a polyhedron if −ĉ lies in the
cone corresponding to the extreme point w∗ (c), or when S is an ellipse and ĉ is in the same
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                               11

                                   Figure 1       Geometric Illustration of SPO Loss




                (a) Polyhedral feasible region                      (b) Elliptic feasible region
Note. In these two figures, we consider a two-dimensional polyhedron and ellipse for the feasible region S. We plot
the (negative) of the true cost vector c, as well as two candidate predictions ĉA and ĉB that are equidistant from
c and thus have equivalent LS loss. One can see that the optimal decision for ĉA coincides with that of c, since
w∗ (ĉA ) = w∗ (c). In the polyhedron example, any predicted cost vector whose negative is not in the gray region will
result in a wrong decision, where as in the ellipse example any predicted cost vector that is not exactly parallel with
c results in a wrong decision.


direction and parallel to c. Deﬁnition 1 formalizes this true SPO loss associated with making
the prediction ĉ when the actual cost vector is c, given a particular oracle w∗ (·) for P (·).
   Definition 1 (SPO Loss). Given a cost vector prediction ĉ and a realized cost
vector c, the true SPO loss ℓw
                                              ∗                      ∗
                             SPO (ĉ, c) w.r.t. optimization oracle w (·) is deﬁned as
  ∗
ℓw               T ∗        ∗
 SPO (ĉ, c) := c w (ĉ) − z (c) .

   Note that there is an unfortunate deﬁciency in Deﬁnition 1, which is the dependence on
the particular oracle w∗ (·) used to solve (2). Practically speaking, this deﬁciency is not a
major issue since we should usually expect w∗ (ĉ) to be a unique optimal solution, i.e., we
should expect W ∗ (ĉ) to be a singleton. Note that if any solution from W ∗ (ĉ) may be used by
the loss function, then the loss function essentially becomes minw∈W ∗(ĉ) cT w − z ∗ (c). Thus, a
prediction model would then be incentivized to always make the degenerate prediction ĉ = 0
since W ∗ (0) = S. This would then imply that the SPO loss is 0.
   In any case, if one wishes to address the dependence on the particular oracle w∗ (·) in
Deﬁnition 1, then it is most natural to “break ties” by presuming that the implemented
decision has worst-case behavior with respect to c. Deﬁnition 2 is an alternative SPO loss
function that does not depend on the particular choice of the optimization oracle w∗ (·).
12                                                      Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



     Definition 2 (Unambiguous SPO Loss). Given a cost vector prediction ĉ and a real-
ized cost vector c, the (unambiguous) true SPO loss ℓSPO (ĉ, c) is deﬁned as ℓSPO (ĉ, c) :=
maxw∈W ∗ (ĉ) cT w − z ∗ (c).
             

     Note that Deﬁnition 2 presents a version of the true SPO loss that upper bounds the version
from Deﬁnition 1, i.e., it holds that ℓw                                           d
                                            ∗
                                       SPO (ĉ, c) ≤ ℓSPO (ĉ, c) for all ĉ, c ∈ R . As mentioned

previously, the distinction between Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 is only relevant in degenerate cases.
In the results and discussion herein, we work with the unambiguous true SPO loss given by
Deﬁnition 2. Related results may often be inferred for the version of the true SPO loss given
by Deﬁnition 1 by recalling that Deﬁnition 2 upper bounds Deﬁnition 1 and that the two
loss functions are almost always equal except for degenerate cases where W ∗ (ĉ) has multiple
optimal solutions.
     Notice that ℓSPO (ĉ, c) is impervious to the scaling of ĉ, in other words it holds that
ℓSPO (αĉ, c) = ℓSPO (ĉ, c) for all α > 0. This property is intuitive since the true loss associated
with prediction ĉ should only depend on the optimal solution of P (·), which does not depend
on the scaling of ĉ. Moreover, this property is also shared by the 0-1 loss function in binary
classiﬁcation problems. Namely, labels can take values in the set {−1, +1} and the predic-
tion model predicts values in R. If the predicted value has the same sign as the true value,
the loss is 0, and otherwise the loss is 1. That is, given a predicted value ĉ ∈ R and a label
c ∈ {−1, +1}, the 0-1 loss function is deﬁned by ℓ0−1 (ĉ, c) := 1(sgn(ĉ) = c) where sgn(·) is the
sign function and 1(·) is an indicator function equal to 1 if its input is true and 0 otherwise.
Therefore, the 0-1 loss function is also independent of the scale on the predictions. This
similarity is not a coincidence; in fact, Proposition 1 illustrates that binary classiﬁcation is
a special case of the SPO framework. All proofs can be found in Appendix B.

     Proposition 1 (SPO Loss Generalizes 0-1 loss). When S = [−1/2, +1/2] and c ∈
{−1, +1}, then ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = 1(sgn(ĉ) = c), i.e., the SPO loss function exactly matches the
0-1 loss function associated with binary classification.

     Now, given the training data, we are interested in determining a cost vector prediction
model with minimal true SPO loss. Therefore, given the previous deﬁnition of the true SPO
loss ℓSPO (·, ·), the prediction model would be determined by following the empirical risk
minimization principle as in (3), which leads to the following optimization problem:
                                                n
                                         1X
                                    min        ℓSPO (f (xi ), ci ) .                                     (4)
                                    f ∈H n
                                           i=1
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                                13

Unfortunately, the above optimization problem is diﬃcult to solve, both in theory and in
practice. Indeed, for a ﬁxed c, ℓSPO (·, c) may not even be continuous in ĉ since w∗ (ĉ) (and
the entire set W ∗ (ĉ)) may not be continuous in ĉ. Moreover, since Proposition 1 demon-
strates that our framework captures binary classiﬁcation, solving (4) is at least as diﬃcult
as optimizing the 0-1 loss function, which may be NP-hard in many cases (Ben-David et al.
2003). We are therefore motivated to develop approaches for producing “reasonable” approx-
imate solutions to (4) that (i) outperform standard PO approaches, and (ii) are applicable
to large-scale problems where the number of training samples n and/or the dimension of the
hypothesis class H may be very large.

3.1.    An Illustrative Example
In order to build intuition, we now compare the SPO loss against the classical least squares
(LS) loss function via an illustrative example. Consider a very simple shortest path problem
with two nodes s and t. There are two edge that go from s to t, edge 1 and edge 2. Thus, a
cost vector c is 2-dimensional in this setting, and the goal is to simply choose the edge with
the lower cost. We shall not observe c directly at the decision-making time, but rather just a
1-dimensional feature x associated with the vector c. Our data consists of (xi , ci ) pairs, and
ci are generated nonlinearly as a function of xi .

                           Figure 2    Difference between prediction and decision residuals




                 (a) Prediction residuals                                (b) Decision residuals
Note. In (a), the residuals for the LS loss function are marked by the dashed lines. The residual is the distance
between the prediction and the true value. In (b), the residuals for the SPO loss function are marked by the dashed
black lines. The residual is 0 when the predicted values are in the right order. Otherwise, the residual is the distance
between the true values.


   The goal of the decision maker is to predict the cost of each edge from the feature using a
simple linear regression model. The intersection of the two lines (corresponding to each edge)
14                                                 Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



will signal the decision boundary in the predict-then-optimize framework. The decision maker
shall try both the SPO and LS loss functions to do the linear regression. In Figure 2, we
illustrate the diﬀerence between LS and SPO by visualizing the residuals for one particular
dataset and linear models for prediction the edge 1 and edge 2 costs. In LS regression, one
minimizes the sum of the residuals squared, which is denoted by the dashed green and red
lines in Figure 2(a). When using SPO loss, we consider “decision residuals” which only occur
when the predictions result in choosing the wrong edge. In these cases, the SPO cost is the
magnitude diﬀerence between the two true costs of edge 1 and edge 2, as depicted in Figure
2(b).
     In Figure 3, we consider another dataset, but this time plot the optimal LS and SPO
linear regression models. In the ﬁrst panel of Figure 3, we plot the dataset and the optimal
decision boundary. In the second panel, we plot the best LS ﬁt to the data, and in the last
two panels we plot two diﬀerent optimal solutions to the SPO linear regression. (In fact, the
SPO ﬁtted models are also optimal for SPO+ loss which we derive in Section 3.2.) Note that
the the SPO loss in Figure 3 is 0, as there are no decision errors as described in Figure 2.
     One can see from Figure 3 that the LS lines very closely approximate the nonlinear data,
although the decision boundary for LS is quite far from the optimal decision boundary. For
any value of x between the dotted black and red lines, the decision maker will choose the
wrong edge. In contrast, the SPO lines need not approximate the data well at all, yet its
decision boundary is nearly-optimal. In fact, the SPO lines have 0 training error, despite
not ﬁtting the data at all. The key intuition is that the SPO loss is incurred anytime the
wrong edge is chosen, and in this example one can construct lines that cross at the right
decision boundary so that the wrong edge is never chosen, resulting in zero SPO loss. Note
that the only important consideration is where the lines intersect, and thus the SPO linear
regression does not necessarily minimize prediction error. Of course, a convex combination
of SPO and LS loss may be used to overcome the unusual looking lines generated. In fact,
there are inﬁnitely optimal solutions to the ERM problem for the SPO loss, all of which just
require that the intersection of the lines occurs between the x values of 0.8 and 0.9.

3.2.    The SPO+ Loss Function
In this section, we focus on deriving a tractable surrogate loss function that reasonably
approximates ℓSPO (·, ·). Our surrogate function ℓSPO+ (·, ·), which we call the SPO+ loss
function, can be derived in a few steps that we shall carefully justify below. Ideally, when
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                          15

                                          Figure 3      Illustrative Example.




Note. The circles correspond to edge 1 costs and the squares correspond to edge 2 costs. Red lines and points
correspond to the least squares fit and predictions, while green lines and points correspond to the SPO fit and
predictions. The vertical dotted lines correspond to the decision boundaries under the true and prediction models.
The SPO+ decision boundary in this stylized example coincides with the SPO decision boundary.




ﬁnding the prediction model that minimizes the empirical risk using the SPO+ loss, this
prediction model will also approximately minimize (4), the empirical risk using the SPO loss.
  To begin the derivation of the SPO+ loss, we ﬁrst observe that for any α ∈ R, the SPO
loss can be written as

                                                      T
                         ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = max           c w − αĉT w + αz ∗ (ĉ) − z ∗ (c)                      (5)
                                        w∈W (ĉ)
                                          ∗
16                                                       Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



since z ∗ (ĉ) = ĉT w for all w ∈ W ∗ (ĉ). Clearly, replacing the constraint w ∈ W ∗ (ĉ) with w ∈ S
in (5) results in an upper bound. Since this is true for all values of α, then
                                                                  
                                         T         T          ∗
                  ℓSPO (ĉ, c) ≤ inf max c w − αĉ w + αz (ĉ) − z ∗ (c) .                                (6)
                                    α    w∈S


In fact, one can show that inequality (6) is actually an equality using duality theory, and
moreover, the optimal value of α tends to ∞. Intuitively, one can see that as α gets large,
then the term cT w in the inner maximization objective becomes negligible and the solution
tends to w∗ (αĉ) = w∗ (ĉ). Thus, as α tends to ∞, the inner maximization over S can be
replaced with maximization over W ∗ (ĉ), which recovers (5). We formalize this equivalence
in Proposition 2 below.

    Proposition 2 (Dual Representation of SPO Loss). For any cost vector prediction
ĉ ∈ Rd and realized cost vector c ∈ Rd , the function α 7→ maxw∈S cT w − αĉT w + αz ∗ (ĉ) is
                                                                  

monotone decreasing on R, and the true SPO loss function may be expressed as
                                                            
                                        T       T        ∗
              ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = lim max c w − αĉ w + αz (ĉ) − z ∗ (c) .                                    (7)
                                   α→∞    w∈S


     Using Proposition 2, we shall now revist the SPO ERM problem (4) which can be written
as
                    n                                                 
                1X                 T               T
           min                                              ∗
                       lim max ci w − αi f (xi ) w + αi z (f (xi )) − z ∗ (ci )
           f ∈H n     αi →∞   w∈S
                  i=1
                    n                                                            
                1X                 T               T             T ∗
         = min         lim max ci w − αi f (xi ) w + αi f (xi ) w (αi f (xi )) − z ∗ (ci )
           f ∈H n     αi →∞   w∈S
                  i=1
                       ( n                                                                  )
                1         X
                              max cTi w − αf (xi )T w + αf (xi )T w∗ (αf (xi )) − z ∗ (ci )
                                  
         = min     lim
           f ∈H n α→∞         w∈S
                          i=1
                     n
                1X
                      max cTi w − 2f (xi )T w + 2f (xi )T w∗ (2f (xi )) − z ∗ (ci )
                          
         ≤ min                                                                                            (8)
           f ∈H n     w∈S
                  i=1
                     n
                1X
                      max cTi w − 2f (xi )T w + 2f (xi )T w∗ (ci ) − z ∗ (ci ) .
                          
         ≤ min                                                                                            (9)
           f ∈H n     w∈S
                  i=1

The ﬁrst equality follows from the fact that z ∗ (αi f (xi )) = αi z ∗ (f (xi )) for any αi > 0. The
second equality follows from the observation that all of the αi variables are tending to the
same value, so we can replace them with one variable which we call α. The ﬁrst inequality
follows from Proposition 2, in particular that setting α = 2 in (6) results in an upper bound
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                    17

on the SPO loss (we shall revisit this speciﬁc choice below). Finally, the second inequality
follows from the fact that w∗ (ci ) is a feasible solution of P (2f (xi )).
   The summand expression in (9) is exactly what we refer to as the SPO+ loss function,
which we formally state in Deﬁnition 3.
   Definition 3 (SPO+ Loss). Given a cost vector prediction ĉ and a realized cost vector
c, the SPO+ loss is deﬁned as ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c) := maxw∈S cT w − 2ĉT w + 2ĉT w∗ (c) − z ∗ (c).
                                                     

   Recall that ξS (·) is the support function of S, i.e., ξS (c) := maxw∈S {cT w}. Using this nota-
tion, the SPO+ loss may be equivalently expressed as ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c) = ξS (c − 2ĉ) + 2ĉT w∗ (c) −
z ∗ (c).
   Before proceeding, we shall provide reasoning as to why inequalities (8) and (9), which
were used to derive SPO+, are indeed reasonable approximations. Although inequality (8)
could have been derived without the intermediary steps before it, we now claim that this
inequality is actually an equality for many hypothesis classes. Namely, for any hypothesis
class H where f ∈ H implies αf ∈ H for all α ≥ 0, then the inequality is tight since minimizing
over αf is equivalent to minimizing over 2f . For example, the hypothesis class of linear
models satisﬁes this property since all scalar multiples of linear models are also linear. Note
that α being absorbed into the hypothesis class was possible because the αi terms in each
summand can be replaced by a single α since they all tend to inﬁnity. We specifically choose
α = 2 (rather than any other positive scalar) because the Bayes risk minimizer of the SPO+
loss (under some conditions) is exactly E[c|x] rather than a multiple of E[c|x]. This notion
will be formalized in Section 4.
   The ﬁnal step, (9), in the derivation of our convex surrogate SPO+ loss function involves
approximating the concave (nonconvex) function z ∗ (·) with a ﬁrst-order expansion. Namely,
we apply the bound z ∗ (2f (xi )) = 2z ∗ (f (xi )) ≤ 2f (xi )T w∗ (ci ), which can be viewed as a ﬁrst-
order approximation of z ∗ (f (xi )) based on a supergradient computed at ci (i.e., it holds
that w∗ (ci ) ∈ ∂z ∗ (ci )). Note that if f (xi ) = ci , then ℓSPO (f (xi ), ci ) = ℓSPO+ (f (xi ), ci ) = 0
which implies that when minimizing SPO+, intuitively we are trying to get f (xi ) to be
close to ci . Therefore, one might expect w∗ (ci ) to be a near-optimal solution to P (2f (xi ))
and thus inequality (9) would be a reasonable approximation. In fact, Section 4 provides
a consistency property under some assumptions that would suggest the prediction f (xi ) is
indeed reasonably close to the expected value of ci if the prediction model is trained on a
suﬃciently large dataset.
18                                                     Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



     Next, we state the following proposition which formally shows that the SPO+ loss is an
upper bound on the SPO loss and it is function is convex in ĉ. Note that while the SPO+
loss is convex in ĉ, in general it is not diﬀerentiable since ξS (·) is not generally diﬀerentiable.
However, Proposition 3 also shows that 2(w∗ (c) − w∗ (2ĉ − c)) is a subgradient of the SPO+
loss, which is utilized in developing computational approaches in Section 5.

     Proposition 3 (SPO+ Loss Properties). Given a fixed realized cost vector c, it holds
that:
 1. ℓSPO (ĉ, c) ≤ ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c) for all ĉ ∈ Rd ,
 2. ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c) is a convex function of the cost vector prediction ĉ, and
 3. For any given ĉ, 2(w∗ (c) − w∗ (2ĉ − c)) is a subgradient of ℓSPO+ (·) at ĉ, i.e., 2(w∗ (c) −
       w∗ (2ĉ − c)) ∈ ∂ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c).

     The convexity of the SPO+ loss function is also shared by the hinge loss function, which is
a convex upper bound for the 0-1 loss function. Recall that the hinge loss given a prediction ĉ
is max{0, 1 − ĉ} if the true label is 1 and max{0, 1 + ĉ} if the true label is −1. More concisely,
the hinge loss can be written as max{0, 1 − cĉ} where c ∈ {−1, +1} is the true label. The
hinge loss is central to the support vector machine (SVM) method, where it is used as a
convex surrogate to minimize 0-1 loss. Recall that, in this setting of binary classiﬁcation, the
SPO loss exactly captures the 0-1 loss as formalized in Proposition 1. In the same setting,
it turns out that the SPO+ loss is equal to the hinge loss evaluated at 2ĉ, i.e., twice the
predicted value, which is formalized below in Proposition 4. This mild discrepancy is due to
our choice of α = 2 in the above derivation of the SPO+ loss; the alternative choice of α = 1
would yield the hinge loss exactly.

     Proposition 4 (SPO+ Loss Generalizes Hinge Loss). Under the same conditions
as Proposition 1, namely when S = [−1/2, +1/2] and c ∈ {−1, +1}, it holds that ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c) =
max{0, 1 − 2cĉ}, i.e., the SPO+ loss function is equivalent to the hinge loss function associ-
ated with binary classification.

     Remark 1 (Connection to structured prediction). It is worth pointing out
that the previously described construction of the SPO+ loss bears some resemblance to the
construction of the structured hinge loss (Taskar et al. (2004, 2005), Tsochantaridis et al.
(2005), Nowozin et al. (2011)) in structured support vector machines (SSVMs). Moreover,
our problem setting expands upon that of structured prediction by utilizing the objective
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                      19

cost of the nominal optimization problem to naturally deﬁne the SPO loss function. That
is, if we deﬁne wi∗ := w∗ (ci ), then the modiﬁed dataset (x1 , w1∗ ), (x2, w2∗ ), . . . , (xn , wn∗ ) may be
regarded as the training data of a structured prediction problem. However, this reduction
throws away valuable information about the cost vectors ci , whereas the SPO+ loss function
naturally exploits this information and upper bounds the SPO loss. Hence, our framework
(and the surrogate SPO+ loss function) may be viewed as a type of reﬁnement of the SSVM
problem (and the structured hinge loss) to settings where there is a natural cost structure.
Note that both the SPO+ loss and the structured hinge loss recover the regular hinge loss
of binary classiﬁcation as a special case. The hinge loss satisﬁes a key consistency property
with respect to the 0-1 loss (Steinwart 2002), which justiﬁes its use in practice. In Section 4
we show a similar consistency result for the SPO+ loss with respect to the SPO loss under
some mild conditions. On the other hand, the structured hinge loss is often inconsistent
(see, e.g., the discussion around equation (11) in Zhang (2004)), although there have been
results on characterizing properties of consistent loss function in multiclass classiﬁcation and
structured prediction (Zhang 2004, Tewari and Bartlett 2007, Osokin et al. 2017).                    
  Remark 2 (When P (·) is a combinatorial or mixed-integer problem). As
mentioned previously, the assumptions that S is convex and closed are without loss of
generality since one can simply replace a possibly non-convex or non-closed set with its
closed convex hull in (2) without changing the optimal value z ∗ (c). To be more concrete,
suppose that S̃ ⊆ Rd is a bounded but possibly non-convex or non-closed set and that S is
the closed convex hull of S̃. Suppose further that the the oracle w∗ (·) returns an optimal
solution in S̃, i.e., w∗ (c) ∈ arg minw∈S̃ cT w ⊆ arg minw∈S cT w for all c ∈ Rd . For example, if
S̃ represents the feasible region of a combinatorial or mixed-integer optimization problem,
then the oracle would correspond to a practically eﬃcient algorithm for this problem. Then,
using the fact that linear optimization on S̃ is equivalent to linear optimization on S, it is
easy to see that the SPO and SPO+ loss functions deﬁned with respect to S̃ exactly equal
the corresponding loss functions deﬁned with respect to S. Finally, using Proposition 3,
one can use the oracle w∗ (c) ∈ arg minw∈S̃ cT w to compute subgradients of the SPO+ loss
function, which can be utilized in computational approaches as described in Section 5.                     
  Applying the ERM principle as in (4) to the SPO+ loss yields the following optimization
problem for selecting the prediction model:
                                         n
                                      1X
                                min         ℓSPO+ (f (xi ), ci ) .                                       (10)
                                 f ∈H n
                                        i=1
20                                                     Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



Much of the remainder of the paper describes results concerning problem (10). In Section
4 we demonstrate the aforementioned Fisher consistency result, in Section 5 we describe
several computational approaches for solving problem (10), and in Section 6 we demonstrate
that (10) often oﬀers superior practical performance over standard PO approaches. Next, we
provide a theoretically motivated justiﬁcation for using the SPO+ loss.

4.     Consistency of the SPO+ Loss Function
In this section, we prove a fundamental consistency property, known as Fisher consistency,
to describe when minimizing the SPO+ loss is equivalent to minimizing the SPO loss. The
Fisher consistency of a surrogate loss function means that under full knowledge of the data
distribution and no restriction on the hypothesis class, the function that minimizes the
surrogate loss also minimizes the true loss (Lin 2004, Zou et al. 2008). One may also say
that the surrogate loss is calibrated with the true loss (Bartlett et al. 2006). Our result is
analagous to the well-known consistency results of the hinge loss and logistic loss functions
with respect to the 0-1 loss – minimizing hinge and logistic loss under full knowledge also
minimizes the 0-1 loss – and provides theoretical motivation for their success in practice.
     More formally, we let D denote the distribution of (x, c), i.e., (x, c) ∼ D, and consider the
population version of the true SPO risk (Bayes risk) minimization problem:

                                    min E(x,c)∼D [ℓSPO (f (x), c)].                                   (11)
                                        f


and the population version of the SPO+ risk minimization problem:

                                   min E(x,c)∼D [ℓSPO+ (f (x), c)] .                                  (12)
                                    f


Note here that we place no restrictions on f (·), meaning H consists of any measurable
function mapping features to cost vectors.
     Definition 4 (Fisher Consistency). A loss function ℓ(·, ·) is said to be Fisher con-
sistent with respect to the SPO loss if arg minf E(x,c)∼D [ℓ(f (x), c)] (the set of minimizers of
the Bayes risk of ℓ) also minimizes (11).
                                  ∗        ∗
     To gain some intuition, let fSPO and fSPO+ denote any optimal solution of (11) and (12),
                                                             ∗
respectively. From (1), one can see that an ideal value for fSPO (x) is simply E[c|x]. In fact, as
long as the optimal solution of P (E[c|x]) is unique with probability 1 (over the distribution
of x ∈ X ), i.e., almost surely, then it is indeed the case E[c|x] is a minimizer of (11) (see
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                        21

Proposition 5 below). Moreover, any function that is almost surely equal to E[c|x] is also a
minimizer of (11). In Theorem 1, we show that under Assumption 1, any minimizer of the
                                        ∗
SPO+ population risk (12) must satisfy fSPO+ (x) = E[c|x] almost surely and therefore also
minimizes the SPO risk (11). In summary, the SPO+ loss is Fisher consistent with the SPO
loss, under Assumption 1.

  Assumption 1. These assumptions imply Fisher consistency of the SPO+ loss function.
  1. Almost surely, W ∗ (E[c|x]) is a singleton, i.e., Px (|W ∗ (E[c|x])| = 1) = 1.
  2. For all x ∈ X , the distribution of c|x is centrally symmetric about its mean E[c|x].
  3. For all x ∈ X , the distribution of c|x is continuous on all of Rd .
  4. The interior of the feasible region S is nonempty.

  Theorem 1 (Fisher Consistency of SPO+). Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Then, any
minimizer of the SPO+ risk (12) is almost surely (over the distribution of x ∈ X ) equal to
E[c|x] and is also a minimizer of the SPO risk (11). Thus, the SPO+ loss function is Fisher
consistent with respect to the SPO loss.

  The key results to prove Theorem 1 are provided in Section 4.1, and the ﬁnal proof is given
in the Appendix. We remark that Assumption 1.1 is only needed to show that E[c|x] is a
minimizer of the SPO risk. This assumption is rather mild as the set of points with multiple
optimal solutions typically has measure 0. In fact, Assumption 1.1 can be removed if one
uses Deﬁnition 1 of the SPO loss which uses a given optimization oracle. Assumption 1.2
ensures that E[c|x] is a minimizer of the SPO+ risk. Note that a random vector d is centrally
symmetric about its mean if d − E[d] is equal in distribution to E[d] − d, or equivalently d is
equal in distribution to 2E[d] − d. This symmetry condition is satisﬁed, for instance, when
the data is assumed to be of the form f (x) + ǫ where ǫ is a zero-mean Gaussian distribution
with a positive semi-deﬁnite covariance matrix. Finally, Assumptions 1.3 and 1.4, both of
which are standard, are used to show that E[c|x] uniquely minimizes the SPO+ risk except
possibly on a set of probability measure zero. Note that Assumptions 1.2 and 1.3 may be
relaxed to hold almost surely with respect to the probability measure of x ∈ X ; but for ease
of presentation we state them for all x ∈ X . In Section 4.1, we discuss examples (provided in
the Appendix) that show how our result may not hold if one of the assumptions are violated.
  As mentioned previously, any minimizer for the least squares (LS) risk is also almost surely
equal to E[c|x], and thus the least squares loss is also Fisher consistent with respect to the
22                                                    Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



SPO loss. Thus, a priori, one cannot claim LS or SPO+ to be better than the other. Indeed,
we have derived a natural surrogate loss function, SPO+, directly from the SPO loss that
maintains a fundamental consistency property of the de facto standard LS loss function.
In fact, it is easy to see that under Assumption 1, any convex combination of the LS and
SPO+ loss functions is Fisher consistent. Since this consistency property applies under full
distributional information and no model misspeciﬁcation (no restriction on hypothesis class),
we show in Section 6 that SPO+ indeed outperforms LS in several experimental settings,
due to its ability to tailor the prediction to the optimization task.

4.1.     Key Results to Prove Fisher Consistency
Throughout this section, we consider a non-parametric setup where the dependence on the
features x is dropped without loss of generality. To see this, ﬁrst observe that the SPO risk
satisﬁes E(x,c)∼D [ℓSPO (f (x), c)] = Ex [Ec [ℓSPO (f (x), c) | x]] and likewise for the SPO+ risk.
Since there is no constraint on f (·) (the hypothesis class consists of all prediction models),
solving problems (11) and (12) is equivalent to optimizing each function value f (x) individu-
ally for all x ∈ X . Therefore, for the remainder of the section unless otherwise noted, we drop
the dependence on x. Thus, we now assume that the distribution D is only over c, and the
SPO and SPO+ risk is deﬁned as RSPO (ĉ) := Ec [ℓSPO (ĉ, c)] and RSPO+ (ĉ) := Ec [ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c)],
respectively. For convenience, let us deﬁne c̄ := Ec [c] (note that we are implicitly assuming
that c̄ is ﬁnite).
     Next, we fully characterize the minimizers of the true SPO risk problem (11) in this setting.
Proposition 5 demonstrates that for any minimizer c∗ of RSPO (·), all of its corresponding
solutions with respect to the nominal problem, W ∗ (c∗ ), are also optimal solutions for P (c̄).
In other words, minimizing the true SPO risk also optimizes for the expected cost in the
nominal problem (since the objective function is linear). Proposition 5 also demonstrates
that the converse is true – namely any cost vector prediction with a unique optimal solution
that also optimizes for the expected cost is also a minimizer of the true SPO risk.

     Proposition 5 (SPO Minimizer). If a cost vector c∗ is a minimizer of RSPO (·), then
W ∗ (c∗ ) ⊆ W ∗ (c̄). Conversely, if c∗ is a cost vector such that W ∗ (c∗ ) is a singleton and
W ∗ (c∗ ) ⊆ W ∗ (c̄), then c∗ is a minimizer of RSPO (·).

     Example 2 in Appendix A demonstrates that, in order to ensure that c∗ is a minimizer of
RSPO (·), it is not suﬃcient to allow c∗ to be any cost vector such that W ∗ (c∗ ) ⊆ W ∗ (c̄). In
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                       23

fact, it may not be suﬃcient for c∗ to be c̄. This follows from the unambiguity of the SPO
loss function, which chooses a worst-case optimal solution in the event that the prediction
allows for more than one optimal solution.
     Next, we provide Proposition 6 which shows suﬃcient conditions for c̄ to be the minimizer
of the SPO+ risk and therefore the minimizer of the SPO risk, implying Fisher consistency.
We also provide conditions for when c̄ is the unique minimizer of the SPO+ risk, which
alleviates any concern that there may be alternate minimizers of the SPO+ risk which are
not Fisher consistent.

     Proposition 6 (SPO+ Minimizer). Suppose that the distribution D of c is continuous
and centrally symmetric about its mean c̄ (i.e., c is equal in distribution to 2c̄ − c).
 a) Then c̄ minimizes RSPO+ (·).
 b) In addition, suppose the interior of S is nonempty. Then c̄ is the unique minimizer of
       RSPO+ (·).

     The two important assumptions in Proposition 6 are that D is centrally symmetric about
its mean and continuous, both of which are not individually suﬃcient to ensure consistency
on their own. Example 3 in Appendix A demonstrates a situation where c is continuous on
Rd and the minimizer of SPO+ is unique, but it does not minimize the SPO risk. Example
4 in Appendix A demonstrates a situation where the distribution of c is symmetric about its
mean but there exists a minimizer of the SPO+ risk that does not minimize the SPO risk.
Example 5 in Appendix A demonstrates a case where the minimizer of SPO+ is not unique
if S is empty while c is continuous and centrally symmetric about its mean.

5.     Computational Approaches
In this section, we consider computational approaches for solving the SPO+ ERM problem
(10). Herein, we focus on the case of linear predictors, H = {f : f (x) = Bx for some B ∈
Rd×p }, with regularization possibly incorporated into the objective function, using the reg-
ularizer Ω(·) : Rd×p → R. (This is equivalent to working with the hypothesis class H = {f :
f (x) = Bx for some B ∈ Rd×p , Ω(B) ≤ ρ} for some ρ > 0.) For example, we may use the ridge
penalty Ω(B) = 21 kBk2F , where kBkF denotes the Frobenius norm of B, i.e., the entry-wise
ℓ2 norm. Other possibilities include an entry-wise ℓ1 penalty or the nuclear norm penalty,
24                                                   Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



i.e., an ℓ1 penalty on the singular values of B. In any case, these presumptions lead to the
following version of (10):
                                        n
                                    1X
                              min         ℓSPO+ (Bxi , ci ) + λΩ(B) ,                               (13)
                             B∈Rd×p n
                                      i=1

where λ ≥ 0 is a regularization parameter. Since the SPO loss is convex as stated in Proposi-
tion 3, then the above problem is a convex optimization problem as long as Ω(·) is a convex
function.
     We mainly consider two approaches for solving problem (13): (i) reformulations based on
modeling ℓSPO+ (·, c) using duality, and (ii) stochastic gradient based methods that instead
rely only on an optimization oracle for problem (2). The reformulation based approach (i)
requires an explicit description of the feasible region S, for example if S is a polytope then
this approach necessitates working with an explicit list of inequality constraints describing S.
On the other hand, the stochastic gradient based approach (ii) does not require an explicit
description of S and instead only relies on iteratively calling the optimization oracle w∗ (·)
in order to compute stochastic subgradients of the SPO+ loss (see Proposition 3). Therefore
it is much more straightforward to apply the stochastic gradient descent approach to prob-
lems with complicated constraints, such as nonlinear problems as well as combinatorial and
mixed-integer problems as mentioned in Remark 2. While approach (i) is more restrictive
in its requirements, it does oﬀer a few advantages. Depending on the structure of S, for
example if S is a polytope with known linear inequality constraints, then approach (i) may
able to utilize oﬀ-the-shelf conic optimization solvers such as CPLEX and Gurobi that are
capable of producing high accuracy solutions for small to medium sized problem instances
(see Section 5.1). However, for large scale instances where d, p, and n might be very large,
conic solvers based on interior point methods do not scale as well. Stochastic gradient meth-
ods, on the other hand, scale much better to instances where n may be extremely large,
and possibly also to instances where d and p are large but the optimization oracle w∗ (·) is
eﬃciently computable due to the special structure of S. The details of the approach (ii) can
be found in Appendix C.

5.1.    Reformulation Approach
We now discuss the reformulation approach (i), which aims to recast problem (13) in a form
that is amenable to popular optimization solvers. To describe this approach, we presume that
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                              25

S is a polytope described by known linear inequalities, i.e., S = {w : Aw ≥ b} for some given
problem data A ∈ Rm×d and b ∈ Rm . The same approach may also be applied to particular
classes of nonlinear feasible regions, although the complexity of the resulting reformulated
problem will be diﬀerent. The key idea is that when S is a polytope, then ℓSPO+ (·, c) is a
(piecewise linear) convex function of the prediction ĉ and therefore the epigraph of ℓSPO+ (·, c)
can be tractably modeled with linear constraints by employing linear programming duality.
Proposition 7 formalizes this approach. (Recall that, for w ∈ Rd and x ∈ Rp , wxT denotes
d × p outer product matrix where (wxT )ij = wi xj .)

     Proposition 7 (Reformulation of ERM for SPO+). Suppose S = {w : Aw ≥ b} is
a polytope. Then the regularized SPO+ ERM problem (13) is equivalent to the following
optimization problem:
                n
            1 X T
                  −b pi + 2(w∗ (ci )xTi ) • B − z ∗ (ci ) + λΩ(B)
                                                         
        min
        B,p n
              i=1
        s.t. AT pi = 2Bxi − ci                                      for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}   (14)
            pi ∈ Rm , pi ≥ 0                                        for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}
            B ∈ Rd×p .

     Thus, as we can see, problem (14) is almost a linear optimization problem – the only part
that may be nonlinear is the regularizer Ω(·). For several natural choices of Ω(·), problem (7)
may be cast as a conic optimization problem that can be solved eﬃciently with interior point
methods. For instance, for the LASSO penalty where Ω(B) = kBk1 , then (14) is equivalent
to a linear program. If Ω(·) is the ridge penalty, Ω(B) = 12 kBk2F , then (14) is equivalent to a
quadratic program. If Ω(·) is the nuclear norm penalty, Ω(B) = kBk∗, then (14) is equivalent
to a semideﬁnite program.

6.     Computational Experiments
In this section, we present computational results of synthetic data experiments wherein we
empirically examine the quality of the SPO+ loss function for training prediction models,
using the shortest path problem and portfolio optimization as our exemplary problem classes.
Following Section 5, we focus on linear prediction models, possibly with either ridge or
entrywise ℓ1 regularization. We compare the performance of four diﬀerent methods:
  1. the previously described SPO+ method, (13).
26                                                             Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



  2. the least squares method that replaces the SPO+ loss function in (13) with ℓ(ĉ, c) =
       1
       2
         kĉ − ck22 and also uses regularization whenever SPO+ does.
  3. an absolute loss function (i.e., ℓ1 ) approach that replaces the SPO+ loss function in (13)
       with ℓ(ĉ, c) = kĉ − ck1 and also uses regularization whenever SPO+ does.
  4. a random forests approach that independently trains d diﬀerent random forest models for
       each component of the cost vector, using standard parameter settings of ⌈p/3⌉ random
       features at each split and 100 trees.
     Note that methods (2.), (3.) and (4.) above do not utilize the structure of S in any way
and hence may be viewed as independent learning algorithms with respect to each of the
components of the cost vector. For methods (1.), (2.), and (3.) above, we include an intercept
column in B that is not regularized. In order to ultimately measure and compare the perfor-
mance of the four diﬀerent methods, we compute a “normalized” version of the SPO loss of
each of the four previously trained models on an independent test set of size 10, 000. Specif-
ically, if (x̃1 , c̃1 ), (x̃2, c̃2 ), . . . , (x̃ntest , c̃ntest ) denotes the test set, then we deﬁne the normalized
                                                                                        Pntest
                                                                                               ℓSPO (fˆ(x̃i ),c̃i )
test SPO loss of a previously trained model fˆ by NormSPOTest(fˆ) :=                       Pntest
                                                                                         i=1
                                                                                                                    . Note
                                                                                              i=1 z (c̃i )
                                                                                                     ∗


that we naturally normalize by the total optimal cost of the test set given full information,
which with high probability will be a positive number for the examples studied herein.

6.1.    Shortest Path Problem
We consider a shortest path problem on a 5 × 5 grid network, where the goal is to go from
the northwest corner to the southeast corner and the edges only go south or east. In this
case, the feasible region S can be modeled using network ﬂow constraints as in Example 1.
We utilize the reformulation approach given by Proposition 7 to solve the SPO+ training
problem (13). Speciﬁcally, we use the JuMP package in Julia (Dunning et al. (2017)) with the
Gurobi solver to implement problem (14). The optimization problems required in methods
(2.) and (3.) are also solved directly using Gurobi. In some cases we use ℓ1 regularization
for methods (1.), (2.), and (3.), in which case, in order to tune the regularization parameter
λ, we try 10 diﬀerent values of λ evenly spaced on the logarithmic scale between 10−6 and
100. Furthermore, we use a validation set approach where we train the 10 diﬀerent models
on a training set of size n and then use an independent validation set of size n/4 to pick the
model that performs best with respect to the SPO loss.
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                                       27

  Synthetic Data Generation Process. Let us now describe the process used for generating
the synthetic experimental data instances for both problem classes. Note that the dimen-
sion of the cost vector d = 40 corresponds to the total number of edges in the 5 × 5 grid
network and that p is a given number of features. First, we generate a random matrix
B ∗ ∈ Rd×p that encodes the parameters of the true model, whereby each entry of B ∗ is
Bernoulli random variable that is equal to 1 with probability 0.5. We generate the training
data (x1 , c1 ), (x2, c2 ), . . . , (xn , cn ) and the testing data (x̃1 , c̃1 ), (x̃2, c̃2 ), . . . , (x̃n , c̃n ) according
to the following generative model:
  1. First, the feature vector xi ∈ Rp is generated from a multivariate Gaussian distribution
      with i.i.d. standard normal entries, i.e., xi ∼ N (0, Ip ).                                                     
                                                                                                              deg
  2. Then, the cost vector ci is generated according to cij =                             √1 (B ∗ xi )j + 3
                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                     + 1 · εji
      for j = 1, . . . , d, and where cij denotes the j th component of ci and (B ∗ xi )j denotes
      the j th component of B ∗ xi . Here, deg is a ﬁxed positive integer parameter and εji is a
      multiplicative noise term that is generated independently at random from the uniform
      distribution on [1 − ε̄, 1 + ε̄] for some parameter ε̄ ≥ 0.
   Note that the model for generating the cost vectors employs a polynomial kernel function
(see, e.g., Hofmann et al. (2008)), whereby the regression function for the cost vector given
the features, i.e., E[c|x], is a polynomial function of x and the parameter deg dictates the
degree of the polynomial. Importantly, we still employ a linear hypothesis class for methods
(1.)-(3.) above, hence the parameter deg controls the amount of model misspecification and
as deg increases we expect the performance of the SPO+ approach to improve relative
to methods (2.) and (3.). When deg = 1, the expected value of c is indeed linear in x.
Furthermore, for large values of deg, the least squares method will be sensitive to outliers in
the cost vector generation process, which is our main motivation for also comparing against
the absolute loss approach that is less sensitive to outliers. On the other hand, the random
forests method is a non-parametric learning algorithm and will accurately learn the regression
function for any value of deg. However, the practical performance of random forests depends
heavily on the sample size n and, for relatively small values of n, random forests may perform
poorly.
  Results. In the following set of experiments on the shortest path problem we described, we
ﬁx the number of features at p = 5 throughout and, as previously mentioned, use a 5 × 5 grid
network, which implies that d = 40. Hence, in total there are pd = 200 parameters to estimate.
28                                                  Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



We vary the training set size n ∈ {100, 1000, 5000}, we vary the parameter deg ∈ {1, 2, 4, 6, 8},
and we vary the noise half-width parameter ε̄ ∈ {0, 0.5}. For every value of n, deg, and ε̄,
we run 50 simulations, each of which has a diﬀerent B ∗ and therefore diﬀerent ground truth
model. For the cases where n ∈ {100, 1000}, we employ ℓ1 regularization for methods (1.)-
(3.), as previously described. When n = 5000 we do not use any regularization (since it did
not appear to provide any value). As mentioned previously, for each simulation, we evaluate
the performance of the trained models by computing the normalized SPO loss on a test set
of 10,000 samples. The computation time for solving one ERM problem using the SPO+ loss
is approximately 0.5-1.0 seconds, 5-30 seconds, and 1-15 minutes for n ∈ {100, 1000, 5000},
respectively. The other methods can be solved in a few seconds using well-developed packages.
Figure 4 summarizes our ﬁndings, and note that the box plot for each conﬁguration of the
parameters is across the 50 independent trials.
     From Figure 4, we can see that for small values of the deg parameter, i.e., deg ∈ {1, 2},
the absolute loss, least squares, and SPO+ methods perform comparably, with the least
squares method slightly dominating in the case of noise with ε̄ = 0.5. The slight dominance
of least squares (and sometimes the absolute loss as well) in these cases might be explained
by some inherent robustness properties of the least squares loss. It is also plausible that,
since the SPO+ loss function is more intricate than the “simple” least squares loss function,
it may overﬁt in situations with noise and a small training set size. On the other hand,
as the parameter deg grows and the degree of model misspeciﬁcation increases, then the
SPO+ approach generally begins to perform best across all instances except when n = 5000,
in which case random forests performs comparably to SPO+. This behavior suggests that
the SPO+ loss is better than the competitors at leveraging additional data and stronger
nonlinear signals.
     It is interesting to point out that random forests generally does not perform well except
when n = 5000, in which case it performs comparably to SPO+, which uses a much simpler
linear hypothesis class. Indeed, when n ∈ {100, 1000}, random forests almost always performs
worst, except for when n = 1000 and deg ∈ {6, 8}, in which case random forests outperforms
least squares, performs comparably to the absolute loss method, and is strongly dominated by
SPO+. Indeed, the cases where n ∈ {1000, 5000} and deg ∈ {6, 8} suggest that least squares
is prone to outliers whereas the absolute loss is not, random forests is slow to converge due
to its non-parametric nature, and SPO+ is best able to adapt to the large degree of model
misspeciﬁcation even with a modest amount of data (i.e., n = 1000).
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                                                                                                                                                29

                                                                     Normalized SPO Loss vs. Polynomial Degree
                                             Method                  Absolute Loss                                Least Squares                         Random Forests                               SPO+
                                                         Training Set Size = 100                                                                                 Training Set Size = 100
                                                          Noise Half−width = 0                                                                                   Noise Half−width = 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●




                 40%                                                                                          ●   ●               50%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●




                 30%                                                                                  ●                           40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●




                                                                                                                                  30%
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●



                 20%                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                              ●


                                                                                          ●   ●                                         ●
                                                                                                                                        ●




                 10%
                                                                                          ●


                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                  20%   ●

                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                    ●




                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●



                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                             ●           ●
                                                                          ●                                                                                                      ●
                                                                          ●           ●                                                                                                  ●



                                                                                                                                  10%
                                                                      ●
                                                             ●



                      0%
                                                             ●
                             ●   ●           ●   ●   ●           ●




                                     1                   2                    4                   6                   8                         1                2                   4               6                   8
                                                         Training Set Size = 1000                                                                                Training Set Size = 1000
Normalized SPO Loss




                                                           Noise Half−width = 0                                                                                   Noise Half−width = 0.5
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                  30%                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●




                 20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●

                                                                                                              ●                                                                                                  ●




                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                  20%                                                                                        ●




                 10%                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●   ●           ●                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                 ●




                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                          ●                       10%                                                            ●       ●




                      0%
                                                             ●
                             ●   ●           ●   ●   ●                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                     1                   2                    4                   6                   8                         1                2                   4               6                   8
                                                         Training Set Size = 5000                                                                                Training Set Size = 5000
                                                           Noise Half−width = 0                                                                                   Noise Half−width = 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●




                 20%                                                                                                              25%

                 15%                                                                                                              20%                                                                                            ●



                                                                                                                                        ●           ●




                 10%                                                                          ●

                                                                                                                                  15%                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                          ●                                                                                  ●


                      5%                                                                                                          10%                                                                    ●


                                                                          ●

                                                                      ●
                                                                      ●
                                                                      ●   ●       ●


                      0%     ●   ●       ●   ●       ●       ●
                                                                 ●


                                                                                                                                  5%
                                     1                   2                    4                   6                   8                         1                2                   4               6                   8
                                                                                                              Polynomial Degree
Figure 4                         Normalized test set SPO loss for the SPO+, least squares, absolute loss, and random forests methods on
                                                                                              shortest path problem instances.


6.2.                       Portfolio Optimization
Here we consider a simple portfolio selection problem based on the classical Markowitz model
(Markowitz 1952). As discussed in Section 1, we presume that there are auxiliary features
that may be used to predict the returns of d diﬀerent assets, but that the covariance matrix
of the asset returns does not depend on the auxiliary features. Therefore, we consider a model
with a constraint that bounds the overall variance of the portfolio. Speciﬁcally, if Σ ∈ Rd×d
denotes the (positive semideﬁnite) covariance matrix of the asset returns and γ ≥ 0 is the
desired bound on the overall variance (risk level) of the portfolio, then the feasible region S
in (2) is given by S := {w : wT Σw ≤ γ, eT w ≤ 1, w ≥ 0}. Here e denotes the vector of all ones
30                                                                                                   Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



and since we only require that eT w ≤ 1, the cost vector c in (2) represents the negative of
the incremental returns of the assets above the risk-free rate. In other words, it holds that
c = −r̃ where r̃ = r − rRF e, r represents the vector of asset returns, and rRF is the risk-free
rate. We use the SGD approach (Algorithm 1 of Appendix C) for training the SPO+ model
of method (1.). Training the SPO+ model takes 3 to 5 minutes for each ERM instance, while
the other methods typically take less than a second. For brevity, we defer the details of the
experimental setup to Appendix D.
                 Figure 5 displays our results for this experiment. Generally we observe similar patterns
as in the shortest path experiment, although comparatively larger values of deg are needed
to demonstrate the relative superiority of SPO+. In summary across all of our experiments,
our results indicate that as long as there is some degree of model misspeciﬁcation, then
SPO+ tends to oﬀer signiﬁcant value over competing approaches, and this value is further
strengthened in cases where more data available. The SPO+ approach is either always close
to the best approach, or dominating all other approaches, making it a fairly suitable choice
across all parameter regimes.

                                                     Normalized SPO Loss vs. Polynomial Degree
                                Method                       Absolute Loss                Least Squares           Random Forests                               SPO+
                                            Training Set Size = 100                                                   Training Set Size = 100
                                                Noise Factor = 1                                                          Noise Factor = 2
                                                                                          ●                                        ●

                                                                                          ●

                                                                                                  10.0%
                 7.5%                                                                                                                                  ●




                                                                                                  8.0%
                 5.0%                                    ●
                                                         ●
Normalized SPO Loss




                                                                                                                                           ●


                                                                                                  6.0%                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●

                                                                                                                                                                     ●

                                                                                      ●
                                             ●
                                             ●
                                             ●   ●           ●
                                                             ●


                 2.5%
                                                 ●           ●



                            ●
                                        ●
                                        ●
                                                                 ●   ●
                                                                                                  4.0%                                                           ●




                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●




                                1                    4                   8            16                      1                4                   8                 16
                                            Training Set Size = 1000                                                  Training Set Size = 1000
                                                Noise Factor = 1                                                          Noise Factor = 2
                                                         ●                                                                         ●


                 3.0%
                                                         ●



                                                                                                                       ●   ●           ●


                                             ●   ●
                                                             ●                                    8.0%
                 2.5%               ●


                                                                                      ●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●

                                                                                                                                                       ●


                                                                                                  6.0%
                                                                                                                                                       ●



                 2.0%   ●
                        ●   ●           ●

                                                                                                                                               ●




                                                                             ●



                 1.5%                                                                                                                                                ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●




                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  4.0%                                                               ●   ●




                 1.0%                                                                                                                                            ●




                                1                    4                   8            16                      1                4                   8                 16
                                                                                      Polynomial Degree
Figure 5                Normalized test set SPO loss for the SPO+, least squares, absolute loss, and random forests methods on
                                                                             portfolio optimization instances.
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                  31

7.     Conclusion
In this paper, we provide a new framework for developing prediction models under the
predict-then-optimize paradigm. Our SPO framework relies on new types of loss functions
that explicitly incorporate the problem structure of the optimization problem of interest.
Our framework applies for any problem with a linear objective, even when there are integer
constraints.
     Since the SPO loss function is nonconvex, we also derived the convex SPO+ loss function
using several logical steps based on duality theory. Moreover, we prove that the SPO+ loss is
consistent with respect to the SPO loss, which is a fundamental property of any loss function.
In fact, our results also directly imply that the least squares loss function is also consistent
with respect to the SPO loss. Thus, least squares performs well when the ground truth is
near linear, although, at least empirically, SPO+ strongly outperforms all approaches when
there is model misspeciﬁcation. In subsequent work, we have shown how to train decision
trees with SPO loss (Elmachtoub et al. 2020) and developed generalization bounds of the
SPO loss function (El Balghiti et al. 2019). Naturally, there are many important directions to
consider for future work including more empirical testing and case studies, handling unknown
parameters in the constraints, and dealing with nonlinear objectives.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of NSF Awards CMMI-1763000, CCF-
1755705, and CMMI-1762744.

References
Ahuja, Ravindra K, Thomas L Magnanti, James B Orlin. 1993. Network ﬂows: theory, algorithms, and
       applications .

Angalakudati, Mallik, Siddharth Balwani, Jorge Calzada, Bikram Chatterjee, Georgia Perakis, Nicolas Raad,
       Joline Uichanco. 2014. Business analytics for ﬂexible resource allocation under random emergencies.
       Management Science 60(6) 1552–1573.

Aswani, Anil, Zuo-Jun Shen, Auyon Siddiq. 2018. Inverse optimization with noisy data. Operations Research
       66(3) 870–892.

Balkanski, Eric, Aviad Rubinstein, Yaron Singer. 2016. The power of optimization from samples. Advances
       in Neural Information Processing Systems. 4017–4025.

Balkanski, Eric, Aviad Rubinstein, Yaron Singer. 2017. The limitations of optimization from samples. Pro-
       ceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing. ACM, 1016–1027.
32                                                        Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



Ban, Gah-Yi, Noureddine El Karoui, Andrew EB Lim. 2018. Machine learning and portfolio optimization.
     Management Science 64(3) 1136–1154.

Ban, Gah-Yi, Cynthia Rudin. 2019. The big data newsvendor: Practical insights from machine learning.
     Operations Research 67(1) 90–108.

Bartlett, Peter L, Michael I Jordan, Jon D McAuliﬀe. 2006. Convexity, classiﬁcation, and risk bounds.
     Journal of the American Statistical Association 101(473) 138–156.

Ben-David, Shai, Nadav Eiron, Philip M Long. 2003. On the diﬃculty of approximately maximizing agree-
     ments. Journal of Computer and System Sciences 66(3) 496–514.

Bertsekas, Dimitri P. 1973. Stochastic optimization problems with nondiﬀerentiable cost functionals. Journal
     of Optimization Theory and Applications 12(2) 218–231.

Bertsekas, Dimitri P. 1999. Nonlinear programming. Athena scientiﬁc Belmont.

Bertsimas, Dimitris, Vishal Gupta, Nathan Kallus. 2018a. Data-driven robust optimization. Mathematical
     Programming 167(2) 235–292.

Bertsimas, Dimitris, Vishal Gupta, Nathan Kallus. 2018b. Robust sample average approximation. Mathe-
     matical Programming 171(1-2) 217–282.

Bertsimas, Dimitris, Vishal Gupta, Ioannis Ch Paschalidis. 2015. Data-driven estimation in equilibrium
     using inverse optimization. Mathematical Programming 153(2) 595–633.

Bertsimas, Dimitris, Nathan Kallus. 2020. From predictive to prescriptive analytics. Management Science
     66(3) 1025–1044.

Bertsimas, Dimitris, Aurélie Thiele. 2006. Robust and data-driven optimization: modern decision making
     under uncertainty. Models, Methods, and Applications for Innovative Decision Making. INFORMS,
     95–122.

Besbes, Omar, Yonatan Gur, Assaf Zeevi. 2015. Optimization in online content recommendation services:
     Beyond click-through rates. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 18(1) 15–33.

Besbes, Omar, Robert Phillips, Assaf Zeevi. 2010. Testing the validity of a demand model: An operations
     perspective. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 12(1) 162–183.

Borwein, Jonathan, Adrian S Lewis. 2010. Convex analysis and nonlinear optimization: theory and examples.
     Springer Science & Business Media.

Bottou, Léon. 2012. Stochastic gradient descent tricks. Neural networks: Tricks of the trade. Springer,
     421–436.

Bottou, Léon, Frank E Curtis, Jorge Nocedal. 2018. Optimization methods for large-scale machine learning.
     Siam Review 60(2) 223–311.

Boyd, Stephen, Stephen P Boyd, Lieven Vandenberghe. 2004. Convex optimization. Cambridge university
     press.
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                                33

Chan, Carri W, Vivek F Farias, Nicholas Bambos, Gabriel J Escobar. 2012. Optimizing intensive care unit
      discharge decisions with patient readmissions. Operations research 60(6) 1323–1341.

Chan, Carri W, Linda V Green, Yina Lu, Nicole Leahy, Roger Yurt. 2013. Prioritizing burn-injured patients
      during a disaster. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 15(2) 170–190.

Chan, Timothy CY, Tim Craig, Taewoo Lee, Michael B Sharpe. 2014. Generalized inverse multiobjective
      optimization with application to cancer therapy. Operations Research 62(3) 680–695.

Cheung, Maurice, Adam N Elmachtoub, Retsef Levi, David B Shmoys. 2016. The submodular joint replen-
      ishment problem. Mathematical Programming 158(1-2) 207–233.

Chu, Leon Yang, J George Shanthikumar, Zuo-Jun Max Shen. 2008. Solving operational statistics via a
      bayesian analysis. Operations Research Letters 36(1) 110–116.

Cohen, Maxime C, Ngai-Hang Zachary Leung, Kiran Panchamgam, Georgia Perakis, Anthony Smith. 2017.
      The impact of linear optimization on promotion planning. Operations Research 65(2) 446–468.

Den       Boer,     Arnoud   V,     Dirk    D     Sierag.       2016.         Decision-based         model   selection.
      https: // www. researchgate. net/ publication/ 282075352_ Decision-based_ model_ selection
      .

den       Hertog,    Dick,   Krzysztof      Postek.     2016.             Bridging     the     gap     between      pre-
      dictive        and     prescriptive       analytics-new           optimization         methodology         needed.
      http: // www. optimization-online. org/ DB_ HTML/ 2016/ 12/ 5779. html .

Deng, Yunxiao, Junyi Liu, Suvrajeet Sen. 2018. Coalescing data and decision sciences for analytics. Recent
      Advances in Optimization and Modeling of Contemporary Problems. INFORMS, 20–49.

Deo, Sarang, Kumar Rajaram, Sandeep Rath, Uday S Karmarkar, Matthew B Goetz. 2015. Planning for hiv
      screening, testing, and care at the veterans health administration. Operations research 63(2) 287–304.

Donti, Priya, Brandon Amos, J Zico Kolter. 2017. Task-based end-to-end model learning in stochastic
      optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 5484–5494.

Drusvyatskiy, Dmitriy, Adrian S Lewis. 2011. Generic nondegeneracy in convex optimization. Proceedings
      of the American Mathematical Society 2519–2527.

Dunning, Iain, Joey Huchette, Miles Lubin. 2017. Jump: A modeling language for mathematical optimization.
      SIAM Review 59(2) 295–320.

El Balghiti, Othman, Adam N Elmachtoub, Paul Grigas, Ambuj Tewari. 2019. Generalization bounds in the
      predict-then-optimize framework. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 14412–14421.

Elmachtoub, Adam N, Jason Cheuk Nam Liang, Ryan McNellis. 2020. Decision trees for decision-making
      under the predict-then-optimize framework. International Conference in Machine Learning .

Esfahani, Peyman Mohajerin, Soroosh Shaﬁeezadeh-Abadeh, Grani A Hanasusanto, Daniel Kuhn. 2018.
      Data-driven inverse optimization with imperfect information. Mathematical Programming 167(1) 191–
      234.
34                                                         Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



Farias, V. 2007. Revenue management beyond estimate, then optimize. Ph.D. thesis, Ph. D. thesis, Stanford
     University, Stanford, CA.

Ferreira, Kris Johnson, Bin Hong Alex Lee, David Simchi-Levi. 2015. Analytics for an online retailer: Demand
     forecasting and price optimization. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 18(1) 69–88.

Gallien, Jérémie, Adam J Mersereau, Andres Garro, Alberte Dapena Mora, Martín Nóvoa Vidal. 2015. Initial
     shipment decisions for new products at zara. Operations Research 63(2) 269–286.

Gupta, Vishal, Paat Rusmevichientong. 2017. Small-data, large-scale linear optimization with uncertain
     objectives. Available at SSRN 3065655 .

Hofmann, Thomas, Bernhard Schölkopf, Alexander J Smola. 2008. Kernel methods in machine learning. The
     annals of statistics 1171–1220.

Jaggi, Martin. 2011. Convex optimization without projection steps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1108.1170 .

Kao, Yi-hao, Benjamin V Roy, Xiang Yan. 2009. Directed regression. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems. 889–897.

Keshavarz, Arezou, Yang Wang, Stephen Boyd. 2011. Imputing a convex objective function. Intelligent
     Control (ISIC), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 613–619.

Kleywegt, Anton J, Alexander Shapiro, Tito Homem-de Mello. 2002. The sample average approximation
     method for stochastic discrete optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization 12(2) 479–502.

Lacoste-Julien, Simon, Mark Schmidt, Francis Bach. 2012. A simpler approach to obtaining an o (1/t)
     convergence rate for the projected stochastic subgradient method. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.2002 .

Levi, Retsef, Robin O Roundy, David B Shmoys. 2006. Primal-dual algorithms for deterministic inventory
     problems. Mathematics of Operations Research 31(2) 267–284.

Lim, Andrew EB, J George Shanthikumar, Gah-Yi Vahn. 2012. Robust portfolio choice with learning in the
     framework of regret: Single-period case. Management Science 58(9) 1732–1746.

Lin, Yi. 2004. A note on margin-based loss functions in classiﬁcation. Statistics & probability letters 68(1)
     73–82.

Liyanage, Liwan H, J George Shanthikumar. 2005. A practical inventory control policy using operational
     statistics. Operations Research Letters 33(4) 341–348.

Markowitz, Harry. 1952. Portfolio selection. The journal of finance 7(1) 77–91.

Mehrotra, Mili, Milind Dawande, Srinagesh Gavirneni, Mehmet Demirci, Sridhar Tayur. 2011. Or prac-
     tice—production planning with patterns: A problem from processed food manufacturing. Operations
     Research 59(2) 267–282.

Mišić, Velibor V, Georgia Perakis. 2020. Data analytics in operations management: A review. Manufacturing
     & Service Operations Management 22(1) 158–169.
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                    35

Molchanov, Ilya. 2005. Theory of random sets, vol. 19. Springer.

Nemirovski, Arkadi, Anatoli Juditsky, Guanghui Lan, Alexander Shapiro. 2009. Robust stochastic approxi-
       mation approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization 19(4) 1574–1609.

Nowozin, Sebastian, Christoph H Lampert, et al. 2011. Structured learning and prediction in computer
       vision. Foundations and Trends® in Computer Graphics and Vision 6(3–4) 185–365.

Osokin, Anton, Francis Bach, Simon Lacoste-Julien. 2017. On structured prediction theory with calibrated
       convex surrogate losses. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 302–313.

Parikh, Neal, Stephen Boyd, et al. 2014. Proximal algorithms. Foundations and Trends® in Optimization
       1(3) 127–239.

Robbins, H., S. Munro. 1951. A stochastic approximation method. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 22
       400–407.

Schütz, Peter, Asgeir Tomasgard, Shabbir Ahmed. 2009. Supply chain design under uncertainty using sample
       average approximation and dual decomposition. European Journal of Operational Research 199(2)
       409–419.

Sen,      Suvrajeet,      Yunxiao        Deng.      2017.              Learning     enabled    optimization:
       Towards      a      fusion      of     statistical   learning     and      stochastic   optimization.
       http: // www. optimization-online. org/ DB_ HTML/ 2017/ 03/ 5904. html .

Simchi-Levi, David. 2013. Om forum—om research: From problem-driven to data-driven research. Manu-
       facturing & Service Operations Management 16(1) 2–10.

Steinwart, Ingo. 2002. Support vector machines are universally consistent. Journal of Complexity 18(3)
       768–791.

Strassen, Volker. 1965. The existence of probability measures with given marginals. The Annals of Mathe-
       matical Statistics 423–439.

Taskar, Ben, Vassil Chatalbashev, Daphne Koller, Carlos Guestrin. 2005. Learning structured prediction
       models: A large margin approach. Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learn-
       ing. ACM, 896–903.

Taskar, Ben, Carlos Guestrin, Daphne Koller. 2004. Max-margin markov networks. Advances in neural
       information processing systems. 25–32.

Tewari, Ambuj, Peter L Bartlett. 2007. On the consistency of multiclass classiﬁcation methods. Journal of
       Machine Learning Research 8(May) 1007–1025.

Tsochantaridis, Ioannis, Thorsten Joachims, Thomas Hofmann, Yasemin Altun. 2005. Large margin methods
       for structured and interdependent output variables. Journal of machine learning research 6(Sep) 1453–
       1484.

Tulabandhula, Theja, Cynthia Rudin. 2013. Machine learning with operational costs. Journal of Machine
       Learning Research 14(1) 1989–2028.
36                                                        Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



Wagner, Harvey M, Thomson M Whitin. 1958. Dynamic version of the economic lot size model. Management
     science 5(1) 89–96.

Wang, Zizhuo, Peter W Glynn, Yinyu Ye. 2016. Likelihood robust optimization for data-driven problems.
     Computational Management Science 13(2) 241–261.

Zhang, Tong. 2004. Statistical analysis of some multi-category large margin classiﬁcation methods. Journal
     of Machine Learning Research 5(Oct) 1225–1251.

Zou, Hui, Ji Zhu, Trevor Hastie. 2008. New multicategory boosting algorithms based on multicategory
     ﬁsher-consistent losses. The Annals of Applied Statistics 2(4) 1290.
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                              37

Appendix

A.    Examples

  Example 1 (Network Flow). An example of the nominal optimization problem is a
minimum cost network ﬂow problem, where the decisions are how much ﬂow to send on
each edge of the network. We assume that the underlying graph is provided to us, e.g., the
road network of a city. The feasible region S represents ﬂow conservation, capacity, and
required ﬂow constraints on the underlying network. The cost vector c is not known with
certainty, but can be estimated from data x which can include features of time, day, edge
lengths, most recent observed cost, and so on. An example of the hypothesis class is the
set of linear prediction models given by H = {f : f (x) = Bx for some B ∈ Rd×p }. The linear
model can be trained, for example, according to the mean squared error loss function, i.e.,
ℓ(ĉ, c) = 12 kĉ − ck22 . The corresponding empirical risk minimization problem to ﬁnd the best
linear model B ∗ then becomes minB n1 ni=1 21 kBxi − ci k22 . The decision rule to ﬁnd the
                                               P

optimal network ﬂow given a feature vector x is w∗ (B ∗ x).         
  Example 2 (Necessity of Assumption 1.1). Suppose that d = 1, S = [−1/2, +1/2],
and c is normally distributed with mean c̄ = 0 and variance 1. Then W ∗ (c̄) = S and
ℓSPO (c̄, c) = ξS (c) − z ∗ (c) = |c| for all c. Clearly though, ℓSPO (1, c) = −c/2 + |c|/2. Moreover,
ℓSPO (1, c) strictly dominates ℓSPO (c̄, c) in the sense that ℓSPO (1, c) ≤ ℓSPO (c̄, c) for all c and
ℓSPO (1, c) < ℓSPO (c̄, c) for c > 0. Therefore, RSPO (1) < RSPO (c̄) and hence c̄ is not a minimizer
of RSPO (·).     
  Example 3 (Necessity of Assumption 1.2). Deﬁne S as the two-dimensional unit
square with extreme points at (0, 0), (1, 0), (1, 1) and (0, 1). Let c have a continuous distribu-
tion on R2 deﬁned in the following manner. The probability that c occurs in each quadrant
is exactly 0.25. The distribution over each quadrant is a folded normal. The mean of the
folded normals is (9, 9) in quadrant 1, (−1, 1) in quadrant 2, (−1, −1) in quadrant 3, and
(1, −1) in quadrant 4. Thus, c̄ = (2, 2) and W ∗ (c̄) = {(0, 0)}. Note that all cost vectors in
quadrant 1 are minimized by (0, 0), quadrant 2 by (1, 0), quadrant 3 by (1, 1), and quadrant
4 by (0, 1). Therefore, Ec [w∗ (c)] = (0.5, 0.5).
  Now we claim c∗ = (0, 0) is the unique minimizer of SPO+ risk. Since w∗ (c) only depends
on which quadrant c lies in and both c and −c lie in each of the four quadrants with equal
probability, it holds that Ec [w∗ (2c∗ − c)] = Ec [w∗ (−c)] = Ec [w∗ (c)] = (0.5, 0.5) which implies
38                                                      Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



that c∗ is optimal. Finally, observe that W ∗ (c∗ ) = S 6⊆ {(0, 0)} = W ∗ (c̄), which means that
by Proposition 5, c∗ is not a minimizer of the SPO risk. 
     Example 4 (Necessity of Assumption 1.3). Deﬁne S as the two-dimensional sim-
plex with extreme points at (0, 0), (1, 0), and (0, 1). Let c have a two point distribution on
the points (−2, 1) and (0, −1), each with probability of 0.5. One can conﬁrm that c̄ = (−1, 0),
W ∗ (c̄) = {(1, 0)}, Ec [w∗ (c)] = (0.5, 0.5), and that c is symmetric around its mean (c is equal
in distribution to 2c̄ − c).
  Now we claim c∗ = (−0.25, −0.5) is a minimizer of SPO+ risk. This is conﬁrmed by checking
that Ec [w∗ (2c∗ − c)] = Ec [w∗ (c)] = (0.5, 0.5). However, W ∗ (c∗ ) = {(0, 1)} 6⊆ {(1, 0)} = W ∗ (c̄).
Thus by Proposition 5, c∗ is not a minimizer of the SPO risk.             
     Example 5 (Necessity of Assumption 1.4). Let S ⊆ R2 be the interval S :=
{(w1 , w2 )T : −1 ≤ w1 ≤ 1, w2 = 0} and let c be distributed according to a standard 2-
dimensional Gaussian random vector with mean (0, 0)T (and covariance matrix equal to the
                                                                          q
identity). Then, one can easily show that RSPO+ (ĉ) = Ec [|c1 − 2ĉ1 |] + π2 . Thus, it is appar-
ent that (0, β)T is a minimizer for SPO+ risk for any β ∈ R. Intuitively, this follows from
the fact that the second dimension is irrelevant for the optimization problem.                 
B.     Omitted Proofs
B.1.    Proof of Proposition 1

     Proof. Let d = 1 and the feasible region be the interval S = [−1/2, +1/2]. Here the “cost
vector” c corresponds to a binary class label, i.e., c can take one of two possible values, −1 or
+1. (However, the predicted cost vector is allowed to be any real number.) Notice that, for
both possible values of c, it holds that z ∗ (c) = −1/2. There are three cases to consider for the
prediction ĉ: (i) if ĉ > 0 then W ∗ (ĉ) = {−1/2} and ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = (1 − c)/2, (ii) if ĉ < 0 then
W ∗ (c) = {+1/2} and ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = (1 + c)/2, and (iii) if ĉ = 0 then W ∗ (ĉ) = S = [−1/2, +1/2]
and ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = (1 + |c|)/2 = 1. Thus, we have ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = 0 when ĉ and c share the same
sign, and ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = 1 otherwise. Therefore, ℓSPO is exactly the 0-1 loss function.             
B.2.    Proof of Proposition 2.

     Proof. Let us ﬁrst prove that the function q(α) := ξS (c − αĉ) + αz ∗ (ĉ) is monotone
decreasing on R. Clearly q(·) is a convex function and moreover a subgradient g of q(·) for
any α is given by g := z ∗ (ĉ) − ĉT w∗ (αĉ − c). Since z ∗ (ĉ) = min ĉT w, we have that g ≤ 0 for
                                                                    w∈S
any α. Now, for any α′ ≤ α, the subgradient inequality implies that:

                               q(α′ ) ≥ q(α) + g · (α′ − α) ≥ q(α) ,
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                             39

since g and α′ − α are both nonpositive. Thus, q(·) is monotone decreasing.
  Let us now prove that

                            ℓSPO (ĉ, c) = inf {ξS (c − αĉ) + αz ∗ (ĉ)} − z ∗ (c) .           (15)
                                             α≥0

The proof of (15) employs Lagrangian duality (see, e.g., Bertsekas (1999) and the refer-
ences therein). First, note that the set of optimal solutions with respect to ĉ, W ∗ (ĉ) :=
arg minw∈S ĉT w may be expressed as W ∗ (ĉ) = S ∩ {w ∈ Rd : ĉT w ≤ z ∗ (ĉ)}. Therefore, it
           

holds that:
                                max cT w                = max cT w
                                  w                          w
                                 s.t. w ∈ W (ĉ)∗
                                                             s.t. w ∈ S                         (16)
                                                                  ĉT w ≤ z ∗ (ĉ) .
Let us introduce a scalar Lagrange multiplier α ∈ R+ associated with the inequality constraint
“ ĉT w ≤ z ∗ (ĉ)” on the right side of (16) and then form the Lagrangian:

                                      L(w, α) := cT w + α(z ∗ (ĉ) − ĉT w) .

Thus q(·) is exactly the dual function, i.e., it satisﬁes:

                            max L(w, α) = max cT w + α(z ∗ (ĉ) − ĉT w)
                                              
                            w∈S           w∈S

                                        = max (c − αĉ)T w + αz ∗ (ĉ)
                                              
                                                    w∈S

                                               = ξS (c − αĉ) + αz ∗ (ĉ) = q(α) .
                                                     T
Weak duality then implies that max                   c w   ≤ inf q(α) and hence:
                                 ∗       w∈W (ĉ)                α≥0
                                   T
           ℓSPO (ĉ, c) =     max  c w − z ∗ (c) ≤ inf {ξS (c − αĉ) + αz ∗ (ĉ)} − z ∗ (c) .
                            w∈W (ĉ)
                                ∗                           α≥0

To prove (15), we demonstrate that strong duality holds by applying Theorem 4.3.8 of
Borwein and Lewis (2010). In our setting, the primal problem is the problem on the
right-hand side of (16). This problem corresponds to the primal minimization problem in
Borwein and Lewis (2010) by considering the objective function given by −cT w + IS (w) and
the constraint function ĉT w − z ∗ (ĉ). (Note that IS (w) is the convex indicator function equal
to 0 when w ∈ S and +∞ otherwise.) Since S is a compact and convex set, we satisfy all
of the assumptions of Theorem 4.3.8 of Borwein and Lewis (2010) and hence strong duality
holds. Finally, since q(·) is a monotone decreasing function, we can apply the monotone
convergence theorem to replace inf α≥0 in (15) by limα→∞ . 
40                                                             Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



B.3.    Proof of Proposition 3.

     Proof. Part (1.) is exactly the chain of inequalities (5)-(9). Since the support function
ξS (·) is a maximum of linear functions, it is convex and therefore part (2.) follows. To see
that part (3.) holds, for any c̃, we have that:

         ℓSPO+ (c̃, c) = ξS (c − 2c̃) + 2c̃T w∗ (c) − z ∗ (c)
                          ≥ ξS (c − 2ĉ) + w∗ (2ĉ − c)T ((c − 2c̃) − (c − 2ĉ)) + 2c̃T w∗ (c) − z ∗ (c)
                          = ξS (c − 2ĉ) + 2w∗ (2ĉ − c)T (ĉ − c̃) + 2c̃T w∗ (c) − z ∗ (c)
                          = ξS (c − 2ĉ) + 2ĉT w∗ (c) − z ∗ (c) + 2(w∗ (c) − w∗(2ĉ − c))T (c̃ − ĉ) ,

where the inequality follows since w∗ (2ĉ − c) ∈ arg maxw∈S {(c − 2ĉ)T w} = ∂ξS (c − 2ĉ) (this
is a standard result in convex optimization, see, e.g., Boyd et al. (2004)). Thus, we conclude
that 2(w∗ (c) − w∗ (2ĉ − c)) ∈ ∂ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c).         
B.4.    Proof of Proposition 4.

     Proof. In the same setup as Proposition 1, we have that S = [−1/2, +1/2] and c ∈
{−1, +1} corresponds to the true label. Note that ξS (c − 2ĉ) = 12 |c − 2ĉ|, and for c ∈ {−1, +1}
we have w∗ (c) = −c/2 and z ∗ (c) = −1/2. Therefore,

       ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c) = 21 |c − 2ĉ| + 2ĉ(−c/2) + 1/2 = 21 |1 − 2ĉc| − ĉc + 1/2 = max{0, 1 − 2ĉc} ,

where the second equality follows since c ∈ {−1, +1}.                  
B.5.    Proof of Theorem 1.

     Proof. Let x ∈ X be ﬁxed. Applying Assumptions 1.2, 1.3, and 1.4 with Propo-
sition 6 implies that the vector E[c|x] = arg min Ec [ℓSPO+ (f (x), c) | x], i.e., E[c|x]
                                                               f (x)∈Rd
is the unique minimizer of Ec [ℓSPO+ (f (x), c) | x]. Thus, since E(x,c)∼D [ℓSPO+ (f (x), c)] =
Ex [Ec [ℓSPO+ (f (x), c) | x]], any minimizer of the SPO+ risk (12) must be almost surely equal
to the function x 7→ E[c|x].
  Again, let x ∈ X be ﬁxed. If W ∗ (E[c|x]) is a singleton, then Proposition 5 implies that
E[c|x] ∈ arg min Ec [ℓSPO (f (x), c) | x], i.e., E[c|x] is a minimizer of Ec [ℓSPO (f (x), c) | x].
               f (x)∈Rd
Since E(x,c)∼D [ℓSPO (f (x), c)] = Ex [Ec [ℓSPO (f (x), c) | x]] and Assumption 1.1 states that
W ∗ (E[c|x]) is a singleton with probability 1 over x, we have that any function that almost
surely equals the function x 7→ E[c|x] is a minimizer of the SPO risk (11). In particular, as
argued in the preceding paragraph, any minimizer of the SPO+ risk (12) must be almost
surely equal to the function x 7→ E[c|x] and therefore minimizes the SPO risk. Thus, we have
shown that the SPO+ loss function is Fisher consistent with respect to the SPO loss.                            
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                     41

B.6.   Proof of Proposition 5.

  Proof. Consider a cost vector c∗ that is a minimizer of RSPO (·). Let w̄ be an optimal
solution of P (c̄), i.e., w̄ ∈ W ∗ (c̄), and let c̃ be chosen such that w̄ is the unique optimal
solution of P (c̃), i.e., W ∗ (c̃) = {w̄}. (Note that if w̄ is the unique optimal solution of P (c̄)
then it suﬃces to select c̃ ← c̄, otherwise we may take c̃ as a slight perturbation of c̄). Then
it holds that:
                                                                             
                            ∗
                                              T                           T
0 ≤ RSPO (c̃) − RSPO (c ) = Ec max              c w − Ec max               c w
                                  w∈W ∗ (c̃)                  w∈W ∗ (c∗ )
                                                                         
         T
                             T                T
                                                                    T              T
                                                                                                 T
  = Ec [c w̄] − Ec max       c  w     =      c̄  w̄ − E c   max      c   w     ≤  c̄  w̄ − max   c̄ w          ,
                       w∈W (c )
                        ∗ ∗                                     w∈W (c )
                                                               ∗ ∗                         w∈W (c )
                                                                                            ∗ ∗



where the ﬁrst inequality and ﬁrst equality are by deﬁnition, the second equality uses W ∗ (c̃) =
{w̄}, the third equality uses linearity of expectation, and the ﬁnal inequality is Jensen’s
inequality. Finally, we conclude that, for any w ∈ W ∗ (c∗ ), it holds that c̄T w ≤ c̄T w̄ = z ∗ (c̄).
Therefore, W ∗ (c∗ ) ⊆ W ∗ (c̄).
  To prove the other direction, consider a cost vector c∗ such that W ∗ (c∗ ) = {w∗ (c∗ )} is a
singleton and W ∗ (c∗ ) ⊆ W ∗ (c̄), i.e., w∗ (c∗ ) ∈ W ∗ (c̄). Let c∗∗ be an arbitrary minimizer of
RSPO (·). Then,
                                                                                           
                        ∗              ∗∗
                                                         T                               T
               RSPO (c ) − RSPO (c ) = Ec max            c w − Ec             max         c w
                                            w∈W ∗ (c∗ )                     w∈W ∗ (c∗∗ )
                                                                               
                                         T ∗ ∗
                                                                          T
                                     = c̄ w (c ) − Ec         max         c w
                                                            w∈W ∗ (c∗∗ )
                                                                           
                                         ∗
                                                                   T
                                     = z (c̄) − Ec       max        c w
                                                              w∈W (c
                                                            ∗ ∗∗        )
                                                                   T
                                            ≤ z ∗ (c̄) −    max    c̄ w     ≤ 0,
                                                           w∈W (c
                                                             ∗ ∗∗   )


where the second equality uses W ∗ (c∗ ) = {w∗ (c∗ )}, the third equality uses w∗ (c∗ ) ∈ W ∗ (c̄),
and the ﬁrst inequality is Jensen’s inequality. Finally, we conclude that since c∗∗ is a minimizer
of RSPO (·) and c∗ has at most the same risk, then c∗ is also a minimizer of RSPO (·).                
B.7.   Proof of Proposition 6.

  Proof. (a) First, note that it is straightforward to show that RSPO+ (ĉ) is ﬁnite valued
for all ĉ, which follows since S is compact and c̄ := E[c] is ﬁnite. Moreover, by Proposition
3, it is clear that RSPO+ (·) is convex on Rd . In particular, for any point ĉ the subdiﬀer-
ential ∂RSPO+ (ĉ) is nonempty and, since RSPO+ (ĉ) is ﬁnite, we have that ∂RSPO+ (ĉ) =
42                                                     Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



Ec [∂ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c)] (see Strassen (1965), Bertsekas (1973)), where the latter refers to the
selection expectation over the random set ∂ℓSPO+ (ĉ, c) (see Section 2.1.2 in Molchanov
(2005)). By the linearity of selection expectation, note that ∂RSPO+ (ĉ) = −2Ec [W ∗ (2ĉ − c)]+
2Ec [w∗ (c)] = −2Ec [w∗ (2ĉ − c)] + 2Ec [w∗ (c)], where the second equality follows since the dis-
tribution of c is continuous on all of Rd which implies that W ∗ (2ĉ − c) is a singleton with
probability 1 (see, e.g., the introductory discussion in Drusvyatskiy and Lewis (2011)).
  Now, the optimality conditions for the convex problem min RSPO+ (ĉ) state that c∗ is a
                                                                   ĉ∈Rd
global minimizer if and only if 0 ∈ ∂RSPO+ (c∗ ). By the discussion in the previous paragraph,
the optimality conditions may be equivalently written as Ec [w∗ (c)] = Ec [w∗ (2c∗ − c)]. Finally,
since c is centrally symmetric around its mean, we have that c is equal in distribution to
2c̄−c; hence Ec [w∗ (c)] = Ec [w∗ (2c̄−c)]. Therefore c̄ satisﬁes 0 ∈ ∂RSPO+ (c̄) and is an optimal
solution of min RSPO+ (ĉ).
              ĉ∈Rd
  (b) Consider any vector ∆ 6= 0, and let us rewrite the diﬀerence RSPO+ (c̄ + ∆) − RSPO+ (c̄)
as follows:
     RSPO+ (c̄ + ∆) − RSPO+ (c̄) = Ec [ξS (c − 2(c̄ + ∆)) + 2(c̄ + ∆)T w∗ (c) − z ∗ (c)] −
                                    Ec [ξS (c − 2c̄) + 2c̄T w∗ (c) − z ∗ (c)]
                                 = Ec [ξS (c − 2c̄ − 2∆) − ξS (c − 2c̄) + 2∆T w∗ (c)]
                                 = Ec [ξS (c − 2c̄ − 2∆) − (c − 2c̄)T w∗ (2c̄ − c) + 2∆T w∗ (c)]
                                 = Ec [ξS (c − 2c̄ − 2∆) − (c − 2c̄ − 2∆)T w∗ (2c̄ − c)]
                                 = Ec [(c − 2c̄ − 2∆)T (w∗ (2c̄ + 2∆ − c) − w∗ (2c̄ − c))] .
The ﬁrst equality follows from the deﬁnitions of RSPO+ (·) and ℓSPO+ (·, ·), the second follows
from linearity of expectation, and the third follows from the deﬁnition of ξS (·). The fourth
equality follows from the fact that c is symmetric about its mean so Ec [w∗ (c)] = Ec [w∗ (2c̄−c)]
and again uses linearity of expectation. The ﬁfth equality follows from the deﬁnition of ξS (·).
  Since w∗ (2c̄+2∆ −c) is the maximizer for c−2c̄ −2∆, we have that (c−2c̄−2∆)T (w∗ (2c̄+
2∆ − c) − w∗ (2c̄ − c)) is a nonnegative random variable. Moreover, since the distribution of c
is continuous on all of Rd and the interior of S is non-empty, there must be some probability
mass where w∗ (2c̄ + 2∆ − c) disagrees with w∗ (2c̄ − c), i.e., it holds that P(w∗ (2c̄ + 2∆ − c) 6=
w∗ (2c̄ − c)) > 0. Note also that w∗ (2c̄ + 2∆ − c) is the unique maximizer for c − 2c̄ − 2∆ with
probability one. Thus, we have P((c − 2c̄ − 2∆)T (w∗ (2c̄ + 2∆ − c) − w∗(2c̄ − c)) > 0) > 0 and
therefore

     RSPO+ (c̄ + ∆) − RSPO+ (c̄) = Ec [(c − 2c̄ − 2∆)T (w∗ (2c̄ + 2∆ − c) − w∗ (2c̄ − c))] > 0 .
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                                43

Thus c̄ + ∆ is not a minimizer of the SPO+ risk, and c̄ must be the unique minimizer.                

B.8.     Proof of Proposition 7

     Proof. Recall that ℓSPO+ (Bxi , ci ) = ξS (ci − 2Bxi ) + 2(Bxi )T w∗ (ci ) − z ∗ (ci ). Linear pro-
gramming strong duality implies that:

                ξS (ci − 2Bxi ) = max (ci − 2Bxi )T w = min −bT pi
                                          w                       p

                                        s.t. Aw ≥ b              s.t. −AT p = ci − 2Bxi
                                                                      p≥0 .

Note also that 2(w∗ (ci )xTi ) • B is just a rewriting of 2(Bxi )T w∗ (ci ) as an explicit linear
function. Thus, introducing variables pi ∈ Rm for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, it is clear that (14) is
equivalent to (13).        
C.     Stochastic Gradient Approach

The idea of this approach is to apply a stochastic gradient method (see, for example,
(Robbins and Munro 1951), Bottou et al. (2018), and the references therein) directly to prob-
lem (13) in its original format. For this approach, we assume that the regularizer is convex
and subdiﬀerentiable (i.e., we can eﬃciently compute subgradients of Ω(·)). For example, the
ridge penalty Ω(B) = 12 kBk2F and ℓ1 penalty Ω(B) = kBk1 satisfy this assumption. While the
algorithm presented herein is generic and can be applied to any subdiﬀerentiable regularizer,
it is worth mentioning that an alternative approach to diﬀerentiating the regularizer Ω(·)
is to apply a proximal gradient type method Parikh et al. (2014), which instead relies on
utilizing the speciﬁc functional form of certain regularizers.
  Let us now describe some more details about how to apply this approach. For convenience,
let us write the objective function of (13) as LnSPO+ (B) := n1 ni=1 φi (B), where φi (B) :=
                                                               P

ℓSPO+ (Bxi , ci ) + λΩ(B). As mentioned in Proposition 3, ℓSPO+ (·, c) is convex (but not nec-
essarily diﬀerentiable) for a ﬁxed c and therefore φi (·) is a convex function. The following
proposition describes how to compute subgradients of φi (·) and also builds on Proposition
3.

     Proposition 8 (Subgradient for SPO+ Linear Regression). Let (xi , ci ) for i ∈
{1, . . . , n}, B ∈ Rd×p , and Ψ ∈ ∂Ω(B) be given. Then, it holds that 2(w∗ (ci ) − w∗ (2Bxi −
ci ))xTi + λΨ ∈ ∂φi (B).
44                                                         Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



     Proof. Recall from Proposition 3 that 2(w∗ (ci ) − w∗ (2ĉ − ci )) ∈ ∂ℓSPO+ (ĉ, ci ) for any ĉ.
Thus, letting ĉ ← Bxi yields for any B ′ that:

          ℓSPO+ (B ′ xi , ci ) ≥ ℓSPO+ (Bxi , ci ) + 2(w∗ (ci ) − w∗ (2Bxi − ci ))T (B ′ xi − Bxi )
                            = ℓSPO+ (Bxi , ci ) + (2(w∗(ci ) − w∗ (2Bxi − ci ))xTi ) • (B ′ − B) ,

and hence 2(w∗ (ci ) − w∗ (2Bxi − ci ))xTi ∈ ∂ℓSPO+ (Bxi , ci ). Therefore, 2(w∗ (ci ) − w∗ (2Bxi −
ci ))xTi + λΨ ∈ ∂ℓSPO+ (Bxi , ci ) + ∂Ω(B) = ∂φi (B).          
  Algorithm 1 presents the application of stochastic subgradient descent with mini-batching
to problem (13). Algorithm 1 is a standard application of stochastic subgradient descent
in our setting, and closely follows Nemirovski et al. (2009). It is important to emphasize
that the main computational requirement of Algorithm 1 is access to the optimization ora-
cle w∗ (·) for problem (2), which is utilized N times during each iteration of the method.
Therefore, Algorithm 1 may be applied in any case when a practically eﬃcient optimization
oracle is available, including some combinatorial and mixed-integer problems as mentioned
in Remark 2. The main parameters that need to be set are the batch size parameter N
and the step-size sequence {γt } (in addition to the regularization parameter λ). In Section
6, we describe precisely how we set these parameters for our experiments. In general, we
recommend setting the batch size parameter to a ﬁxed constant such as 5 or 10. The choice
of the step-size depends on the properties of the regularizer Ω(·). For general convex Ω(·), or
simply when λ = 0, we recommend following Nemirovski et al. (2009) where it is suggested
                                       θ
to set the step-size sequence to γt = √t+1 for a ﬁxed constant θ > 0. In the case of the ridge
penalty Ω(B) = 12 kBk2F and when λ > 0, since this function is strongly convex one may
                                                    2
alternatively set the step-size sequence to γt = λ(t+2) . Since the SPO+ loss function is convex
but non-smooth (and also Lipschitz continuous), these are essentially the only two options
                                                                                       θ
that will lead to a precise convergence rate guarantee. Indeed, for the sequence γt = √t+1 ,
Nemirovski et al. (2009) derive an O(1/ǫ2 ) complexity guarantee in terms of the number of
iterations required to ensure that the averaged iterate is ǫ-suboptimal in expectation. It is
also straightforward to see that this guarantee can be extended to cases when the optimiza-
tion oracle w∗ (·) is only computed approximately with an additive approximation error, as
long as we only desire convergence on the order of the accuracy of the oracle. On the other
hand, Lacoste-Julien et al. (2012) derive a similar O(1/(λǫ)) complexity guarantee for the
        2
γt = λ(t+2) sequence.
Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”                                           45

Algorithm 1 Stochastic Subgradient Descent with Mini-Batching for Problem (13)
  Initialize B0 ∈ Rd×p (typically B0 ← 0), t ← 0. Set batch size parameter N ≥ 1.


  At iteration t ≥ 0:
  1. For j = 1, . . . , N :
            Sample i uniformly at random from the set {1, . . . , n} .
            Compute w̃tj ← w∗ (2Btxi − ci ) .
            Set G̃jt ← (w∗ (ci ) − w̃tj )xTi .
  2. Select γt > 0 and compute:
            Ψt ∈ ∂Ω(Bt)
            Gt ← N1 N      j
                   P
                     j=1 G̃t + λΨt

            Bt+1 ← Bt − γt Gt
            B̄t ← Pt 1 γs ts=0 γs Bs .
                         P
                      s=0




  It is important to note that Algorithm 1 is a standard and basic application of stochastic
subgradient descent, and that one may consider making several adjustments to the method in
order to improve its practical and possibly theoretical performance (see, e.g., Bottou (2012),
and Bottou et al. (2018) and the references therein). We also mention that one may employ
early stopping with this method, whereby we maintain a validation set to monitor (estimates
of) the out-of-sample true SPO loss as the algorithm runs and then ultimately choose the
averaged iterate B̄t with the smallest true SPO loss ℓSPO on the validation set as the ﬁnal
model.
D.    Experimental Details of Portfolio Optimization Application

In this experiment, we set the number of assets d = 50 and the return vectors and features
are synthetically generated according to a similar process as before. As before, we generate
a random matrix B ∗ ∈ Rd×p that encodes the parameters of the true model, whereby each
entry of B ∗ is Bernoulli random variable that is equal to 1 with probability 0.5. Then, for
some noise level parameter τ ≥ 0, we generate a factor loading matrix L ∈ R50×4 such that
each entry of L is uniformly distributed on [−0.0025τ, 0.0025τ ] independently of everything
else. To generate a training/testing pair (xi , ci ), as before we ﬁrst generate the feature vector
xi ∈ Rp from a multivariate Gaussian distribution with i.i.d. standard normal entries, i.e.,
46                                                      Elmachtoub and Grigas: Smart “Predict, then Optimize”



xi ∼ N (0, Ip ). Then, the incremental return vector r̃i is generated according to the following
process:
 1. The conditional mean r̄ij of the j th asset return is set equal to r̄ij :=
                               deg
      0.05
      √ (B ∗ xi )j + (0.1)1/deg
         p
                                     , where deg is a ﬁxed positive integer parameter.
 2. The observed return vector r̃i is set to r̃i := r̄i + Lf + 0.01τ ε, where f ∼ N (0, I4) and
     ε ∼ N (0, I50 ). The cost vector ci is set to ci := −r̃i .
  It follows from step (2.) above that, conditional on the observed features xi ∈ Rp , the
covariance matrix of the returns is Σ = LLT + (0.01τ )2 I50 . We set the risk level parameter γ,
which is part of the deﬁnition of the feasible region S, to γ := 2.25 · w̄T Σw̄ where w̄ := e/10
is the equal weight portfolio. Note that the particular functional form of the conditional
mean returns in step (1.) above is also a polynomial function of the features x and that the
parameters are set so that r̄ij ∈ [0, 1] with high probability. In this experiment, the number
of features p is again kept ﬁxed at 5. We varied the training set size n ∈ {100, 1000}, the
parameter deg ∈ {1, 4, 8, 16}, and the noise level parameter τ ∈ {1, 2}. For each combination
of these two parameters, we again ran 50 independent trials and used a test set of size 10,000.
We do not use any regularization in this experiment, we use the SGD approach (Algorithm
1 of Appendix C) for training the SPO+ model of method (1.), and in the same manner as
before we directly solve the optimization problems of methods (2.) and (3.) using Gurobi.
Note that, out of fairness to the other methods, we did not use the early stopping technique
for SGD.
